                  Anti­‑Romani terrorism in Europe
                                                                                    1




                                       Miroslav Mareš




Politics in Central Europe (ISSN: 1801-3422)
Vol. 12, No. 2
DOI: 10.1515/pce-2016-0013




Abstract: This article analyzes terrorism against the Roma in Europe. It identifies acts
of terrorism in violence that targets the largest stateless nation on the continent and
categorizes this terrorism according to current research methods. Focusing on events in
both Western and Eastern Europe, the article analyses and compares the most significant
terrorist acts against the Roma of recent years. It concludes that anti­‑Romani terrorism
is heterogeneous in terms of tactics, strategies, and ideological justification, yet can
usually be subsumed into the broadly conceived category of far­‑right terrorism. The
variety of attacks suggests that terrorist acts are an offshoot of the broad spectrum of
anti­‑Romani activity, and are influenced by contemporary trends in inter­‑ethnic violence.

Key words: Romani people, terrorism, Europe, far right, racist violence




Introduction
For several decades now, a wave of substantial anti­‑Romani violence has been
present in Europe, a continent on which the Roma are the largest stateless
ethnic group or nation. This article analyzes violence against the Roma throu‑
gh the prism of terrorism. The issue is examined from the point of view of the
victims—members of the Romani population or its constituent ethnicities.
Building upon this basis, the strategies of the terrorists themselves are analyzed
and categorized according to the generally respected typologies of terrorism.
In order to do this, a framework for analysis is first introduced; this is based
on the typologies of terrorism in general and those of far­‑right terrorism in

1   This article was written as part of the grant project GAČR GA408/11/0709 “Contemporary challenges
    of democracy in East Central Europe,” funded by the Czech Science Foundation. Translated by Štěpán
    Kaňa.


Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                                            69

particular, as most acts of anti­‑Romani terrorism to date have been classified
as right­‑wing extremism (Backes 2012: 61). The issue of anti­‑Romani violence
is then described and an overview provided of those anti­‑Romani acts which
fulfill the characteristics of terrorism and its various categories. In conclusion,
the significance of anti­‑Romani terrorism is evaluated in view of its strategic
use of violence.
    The fundamental research question of the article is the following: what forms
does terrorist violence against the Roma take in Europe? The complementary
question is: how important is anti­‑Romani violence in terrorist strategies? To
answer both, descriptive and historical methods are used, as well as an analyti‑
cal approach that applies typologies to actual cases. Anti­‑Romani violence is
not limited to Europe, it also appears in North America and the Middle East
(Yıldız 2015); the focus of this article is, however, on the situation in Europe.

Anti­‑Romani terrorism from the viewpoint of the typologies of
terrorism
There is no agreed definition of terrorism, either among experts or within the
international community more generally. An analysis of the factors that make
defining terrorism so difficult is beyond the scope of the present article; a num‑
ber of renowned scholars have been involved in this effort, and the reader is
referred to their findings (Graborsky – Stohl 2010, Martin 2013, Schmid 2011).
The main causes are the normative viewpoints assumed and the heterogeneity of
the phenomena described as terrorism. The normative issue is that the concept
of terrorism has negative connotations, and thus there is a tendency not to use
the discrediting term terrorist to describe oneself or one’s allies.
    The heterogeneity is linked to the great variety of violent acts that are de‑
scribed as terrorism. Among other things, there is discussion as to whether ter‑
rorism involves only subversive activities against those in power, or whether the
term can also be used to describe repressive measures taken by power holders
against their populations (e.g. the Stalinist purges in the Soviet Union). What
constitutes a terrorist target is also problematic. According to some authors,
one should speak of terrorism only when innocent civilians are targeted; others
also consider peacetime attacks against power holders and military/security
personnel as terrorism. The issue of terrorism during war also presents a chal‑
lenge for conceptualizing the phenomenon. There are more such problems
(Mareš 2005: 27–31).
    Well­‑known terrorism scholar Alex P. Schmid has analyzed several hundred
definitions of terrorism and identified the following core features:
    1. The demonstrative use of violence against human beings;
   2. The (conditional) threat of (more) violence;
   3. The deliberate production of terror or fear in a target group;

70                                             Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

   4. The targeting of civilians, non­‑combatants and innocents;
   5. The purpose of intimidation, coercion and/or propaganda;
   6. The fact that it is a method, tactic or strategy of waging conflict;
   7. The importance of communicating the act(s) of violence to larger audi‑
       ences;
   8. The illegal, criminal, and immoral nature of the act(s) of violence;
   9. The predominantly political character of the act;
   10. Its use as a tool of psychological warfare to mobilize or immobilize sec‑
       tors of the public (Schmid 2011: 74).

 Many of the characteristics cited above are present in one of the most accep‑
 ted definitions of terrorism, adopted in UN Security Council resolution 1566
 (2004). This resolution describes terrorism as “criminal acts, including against
 civilians, committed with the intent to cause death or serious bodily injury, or
 taking of hostages, with the purpose to provoke a state of terror in the general
 public or in a group of persons or particular persons, intimidate a population
 or compel a government or an international organization to do or to abstain
 from doing any act, which constitute offences within the scope of and as defi‑
 ned in the international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism” (UN
 Security Council 2004).
    Thus, the essence of terrorism is that it is aimed at targets not directly as‑
 sociated with combatants in a military conflict and, by doing so, intimidates
 a broader public (government, the general public, or a specific group of peo‑
 ple). In terms of terrorism being employed as a strategy, what matters is that
 terrorists or terrorist groups choose to commit terrorism when they deem it
 suitable for achieving their goals. Terrorism is therefore an intentional exces‑
 sive anthropogenic threat.
    The definition of terrorism is difficult, and so is its typology. Acts of terror‑
 ism can be classified according to many criteria. One of them focuses on the
 ideological motivations or goals that drive the terrorists. In this respect, one
 can speak of religious, extreme­‑left, extreme­‑right, ethnic­‑territorial and single­
‑issue terrorism. A discussion is underway as to whether violence employed in
 the support of democratic ideas—for example, against a dictatorship—should
 be classified as terrorism. Another possible criterion for defining terrorism fo‑
 cuses on whether it must be undertaken by purely non­‑state subjects, or whether
 state actors may be variously involved (by funding, secret services activities,
 etc.; Kraus 2014). Terrorism can be committed by groups or individuals with
 variously weak or strong links to an organization or movement, and includes
 acts committed by so­‑called lone wolves.
    In terms of the strategies in support of which terrorist methods are deployed,
 one may consider the simple intimidation of an adversary by the brutality
 of a terrorist act (or threat thereof), or a more elaborate approach that aims

Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                              71

 to recruit new supporters by means of the terrorist act (the terrorists’ self­
‑understanding as an avant­‑garde). Acts of terrorism against persons or groups
 which are perceived by a significant segment of society as aberrant, can send
 out a strong message that the perpetrators would be better able to secure law
 and order than the existing powers (vigilante terrorism). Terrorism can also
 be used to create chaos, or organize false­‑flag operations (imputed to political
 opponents), so that the political wing of the terrorist organization gains the
 sympathies of the general public to the detriment of those to whom the attacks
 have been ascribed (a strategy of tension). All of these variants of terrorism send
 out an ideological message, whether by the act itself (the symbolism of targets,
 etc.) or in accompanying communications (Bötticher – Mares 2012: 237).
     All of these categories need to be understood as an analytical framework; the
 typologies may complement each other, and individual categories within a typol‑
 ogy may permeate; for example, ethnic terrorism may be motivated by a far­‑left,
 far­‑right or religious ideology, or vigilante terrorists may think of themselves
 as an avant­‑garde. Terrorism may also be classified according to the means of
 implementation (e.g. suicidal terrorism), its geopolitical origin (Middle East
 terrorism), the space in which it is executed (cyber terrorism) or the targets it
 chooses (airline terrorism). Within the last category, the targets can also be of
 a group character (for instance, anti­‑Semitic terrorism), an important point for
 defining anti­‑Romani terrorism.
     Existing studies on terrorism that have at least partially concerned them‑
 selves with violence against the Roma have mostly analyzed extreme­‑right ter‑
 rorism (Backes 2012: 61, Mareš 2014, Ravndal 2015: 26) and, to a small degree,
 lone­‑wolf terrorism (Hartleb 2013: 83), and terrorism within a regional frame‑
 work (Mareš 2011: 243–244, Marton 2011: 18–19). Hence one needs to focus,
 above all, on an analytical framework for the study of extreme­‑right terrorism.
     Scholars have chiefly studied this kind of terrorism either in Western Europe
 and the US (Holbrook – Taylor 2013, Ravndal 2015), or in Russia (Laryš – Mareš
 2011). Although anti­‑Romani violence does appear in these areas, it is not as
 prominent there as in East­‑Central and South East Europe (Mudde 2005: 274–
 275). Yet the study of anti­‑Romani terrorism must be conceived in a broader
 geopolitical context. Violence against the Roma materializes in many places
 where stateless nations are to be found.
     In the mid-1990s, Ehid Sprinzak undertook a global summary analysis of
 extreme­‑right terrorism (without explicitly mentioning violence against the
 Roma). He categorized extreme­‑right terrorism as follows:
     1. Revolutionary terrorism (seeking to establish a far­‑right regime);
     2. Reactive terrorism (seeking to preserve a far­‑right regime or restore its
         power);
     3. Vigilante terrorism (seeking to establish or maintain order in an existing
         regime);

72                                              Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

   4. Racist terrorism (seeking to establish a society based on racial hierarchy);
   5. Millenarian terrorism (terrorism of religious groups believing that the end
       of the world is imminent and they have been chosen; they use terrorist
       violence against the society of sin that surrounds them);
   6. Youth counterculture terrorism (terrorist violence is used as part of youth­
      ‑counterculture rebellion; as Sprinzak points out, only a small part of the
       violence committed by subcultures or countercultures such as skinheads
       can be classified as terrorism) (Sprinzak 1995: 22–37).

An important criterion within the typology of terrorism is selectivity. Maxmilián
Strmiska writes about the “individualization” of selectively targeted victims on
the one hand, and he describes a general framework of the choice of victims of
non­‑selective terrorism on the other hand (Strmiska 2001: 41). An affiliation to
a specific ethnic, religious or political group can be a specific criterion of partial
selectivity of the victim from the point of view of a terrorist perpetrator. Another
approach can be connected with symmetry, or asymmetry, of a terrorist group
in relation to the targeted group (Souleimanov, 2006: 20–21). The concept of
symmetric or asymmetric threats can also be connected with so­‑called “group
security” (Juříček, Rožňák, 2014: 92), which is related to the security of specific
societal groups within the state, for example, ethnic entities. These entities can
be threatened by violent representatives of the more powerful groups.
    Bearing in mind the definitions and typologies of terrorism provided above,
the key criterion for identifying anti­‑Romani terrorism is that of excessive vio‑
lence targeted specifically against the Roma. It is terrorism aimed against an
ethnic group or a stateless nation, i.e. people who do not formally hold power.
The objective is to send a threatening message to the Roma people either lo‑
cally or more widely. In order to qualify as terrorism as defined above, the act in
question must be motivated by at least a simple strategic calculation; it cannot
be, for instance, a random skirmish between two youth gangs. In many cases,
instances of extreme­‑right terrorism overlap with those of hate crime (Transna‑
tional Terrorism, Security & Rule of Law 2008: 5); the distinguishing features
of terrorism are, precisely, the exceptional brutality of the violence involved, the
presence of a strategic calculus, and the dissemination of a threatening message.

Anti­‑Romani violence in contemporary Europe
Even with this definition, it is difficult to differentiate anti­‑Romani terrorism
from other forms of anti­‑Romani violence, as such violence can take very di‑
fferent forms, and an element of intimidation of the Romani community (or
part thereof) is present in many of them. There are currently about 12 million
Roma in the world (European Union 2015). Roma are considered an ethnic
group, or the sum of various subethnic groups, by some scholars (Jakoubek

Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                             73

2008), or as a stateless nation by other scholars and by a large part of Roma
representation) (Pečínka 2009). A significant proportion of them are exposed
to marginalization, which according to some definitions fulfils the conditions
of what has been described as structural or systemic violence (e.g. segregation
in education, failures in child protection, denial of access to health care, and
social assistance, etc.; European Roma Rights Centre 2012c). A more detailed
typology of violence against the Roma can be found in the following scheme,
devised on the basis of an analysis undertaken by the European Association for
the Defense of Human Rights (2012).

Table 1: Violence against the Roma

                                      Physical violence against Roma
 State violence                                                            Social violence
                                      by individuals or groups

- Anti-Roma rhetoric by political     - Racist bias maintained by the     - Poor quality, unsanitary hous-
 parties                               media                               ing

- Violence of the authorities         - Roma as victims of violence by    - Exclusion from the health
 towards Roma                          the people                          system

                                      - Roma people particularly are      - Segregation in the educational
- Detention of Roma people
                                       victims of trafficking              system

- Segregation of Roma                                                     - Difficult access to employment

- Illegal sterilization of Roma
 women

- Official refusal to recognize the
 Nazis’ Romani genocide


Source: European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (2012)


Even if we focus solely on physical violence against the Roma by individuals or
groups, the spectrum of its forms is very broad. Anti­‑Romani violence has been
developing ever since the arrival of the first Roma into Europe, where they have
been subjected to repression. Examining the strategies of those opposed to the
Roma today, one finds references to historical forms of anti­‑Romani violence,
such as the brutal punishments of European rulers meted out to the Roma since
their arrival in Europe, or the celebration of the Romani genocide committed
during the Nazi period. For instance, at a demonstration in Varnsdorf, Czech
Republic, in 2011, the inscription on one woman’s T­‑shirt read “Revive Hitler—
Roma to the gas chamber” (Policie České republiky 2011).
   The main forms of non­‑state, physical anti­‑Romani violence in contemporary
Europe are the following:


74                                                             Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

   1. Anti­‑Romani riots, in which a crowd of people, usually led by extreme­‑right
       activists, attempts to attack housing estates inhabited by Romani people
       (e.g. in Bulgaria or the Czech Republic);
   2. Non­‑state vigilante patrols, usually made up of members of extreme­‑right
       paramilitary organizations, who intend to prevent Romani crime;
   3. Non­‑premeditated, situational violence against the Roma;
   4. Premeditated extremist violence, which does not reach the intensity of
       terrorism;
   5. Terrorist violence against the Roma;
   6. The planning of a Romani genocide or ethnic war against the Roma (Mareš
       2012: 285–294).

 State violence might be committed by police forces when they take unreasona‑
 ble measures against the Roma (for example, anti­‑racism organizations have
 criticized the steps taken during the clearing out of Romani camps by French
 authorities; Amnesty International 2015: 15–17), or, in specific cases, by quasi­
‑state military forces (e.g. the violence committed on the Roma during the crisis
 in Ukraine by the armed forces of the separatist republics; Organization for
 Security and Cooperation in Europe 2014: 28–29).
    The total extent of anti­‑Romani violence is difficult to estimate, as no clear
 and comprehensive statistics of these acts are kept. Internationally, the Organi‑
 zation for Security and Cooperation in Europe does some work on the issue
 as part of its monitoring of hate crimes; however, only a handful of states and
 international organizations supply information as part of this monitoring,
 and statistics are available only from 2008 onwards (Organization for Coop‑
 eration and Security in Europe 2015). Materials by other non­‑governmental
 organizations contain merely listings from certain countries or areas (Amnesty
 International 2015, European Roma Rights Centre 2012a, b). Studies do exist
 that investigated the situation in the 1990s; however, they are focused on other
 aspects of anti­‑Romani racism and exclude statistics concerning its victims
 (Mudde 2005). One can also find thorough case studies focused on individual
 countries (Kučera 2011).
    An approximate but expert estimate on the basis of the above­‑mentioned
 sources indicates that since 1989 about 500 Roma have been killed in Europe
 in racially­‑motivated acts of physical interpersonal violence, about two­‑thirds
 of them during the 1990s. The number of injured has been greater by an order
 of magnitude, and apparently a large part of the Romani community fears such
 attacks. Though most often occurring in East­‑Central and South East Europe,
 in recent years anti­‑Romani violence has also flared up in Eastern Europe
 (Ukraine) and Western Europe (in connection with the migration of Roma from
 Central and Eastern Europe) (Human Rights First 2008: 111–112).


Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                          75

Specifying anti­‑Romani terrorism
Anti­‑Romani violence in Europe covers a broad spectrum, creating among the
Romani population a widespread atmosphere of fear, which acts such as planned
attacks, mass anti­‑Romani protests featuring elements of violence, attempts at
lynching real or supposed Romani criminal offenders, etc contribute to. For
that matter, even in the study of other forms of terrorism, mob attacks direc‑
ted by terrorists that have atrocious consequences are sometimes described
as terrorism, for example, the killing of the U.S. ambassador in Libya in 2012
when a mob stormed the embassy (United States Department of State 2013: 6).
    Considering such acts of anti­‑Romani countercultural or subcultural violence,
one observes elements of at least some premeditation and attempts to intimi‑
date the Romani community in a number of deeds not otherwise described as
terrorism, thus rendering them terrorist in character. For instance, when racist
skinheads mounted an assault in Písek in the Czech Republic in 1993, they had
planned a punitive expedition against the Roma in a specific town. During this
expedition, a young local Rom was murdered, having been driven into the river
where he drowned. This was real intimidation of the Romani community in the
Czech Republic (Mareš 2014).
    Subcultural violence—committed in particular by skinheads—has been be‑
hind the deaths and injuries of many Roma in Central and Eastern Europe,
especially during the 1990s and 2000s. As already indicated above, within this
violence one must differentiate various forms of attack on the Roma. Racist
skinheads, who were dominant among the young extremist groups, were re‑
sponsible for the overwhelming majority of these attacks. Yet there were also
anti­‑racist and leftist currents within the skinhead movement, for example,
Skinheads Against Racial Prejudice (SHARP). Nonetheless, from around 2005
onwards these groups were gradually replaced by new subcultural phenomena,
principally the Autonomous Nationalists (Vejvodová 2014: 80–88).
    Within the skinhead subculture groups appeared that began to think of
themselves as the main vehicles of violent and armed struggle. Principally these
were branches of the organizations Hammerskins Nation (HSN, founded in the
USA in the late 1980s) and Blood & Honour (established at the same time in
the UK). Originally created as an independent entity in Great Britain, Combat
18 gradually associated itself with Blood & Honour, serving as its militant wing
(Bötticher – Mareš 2013).
    As early as the first half of the 1990s, these organizations expanded into Cen‑
tral and Eastern Europe, where the Romani population (alongside immigrants,
leftist adversaries, etc.) became the targets of their hateful propaganda. Whether
the specific attacks on the Roma that took place were committed by actual mem‑
bers of these groups or by people who were passive recipients of their propaganda
without themselves being incorporated into the organizational structures of

76                                             Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

these groups is, however, difficult to judge. The judiciary did not always investi‑
gate these aspects in cases such as the murder of a Romani woman in Slovakia
in 2000 or the attack in Vítkov, Czech Republic, in 2009 during which a two­‑year
old girl suffered severe burns (Mayer – Odehnal 2010: 159–160). In other cases
exhibiting the traits of terrorism, an organized background was not proved.
    Even where such affiliations are proven, the cases are not necessarily judi‑
cially recognized as terrorism according to the prevailing law, for instance, due
to the allegedly low intensity of violence and its consequences. An example of
this is the arson attack committed in Aš, Czech Republic, on 26 February 2011
by two young neo­‑Nazis who claimed allegiance to the regional branch of Com‑
bat 18 Sudetenland (Vegrichtová 2013: 156). There have also been cases where
an organization understood to be terrorist made threats against the Romani,
but without violence occurring. For instance, Combat 18 in Northern Ireland
made threats against Roma who had immigrated into the area from East­‑Central
Europe (Breen­‑Smyth 2009).
    More well­‑known is the case of Anders Breivik, who in 2011 aimed his act
of terrorism against the government of Norway (though in actual fact he killed
several civilians close to Norwegian government buildings) and young left­‑wing
activists, whom he considered bearers of “cultural Marxism.” In his manifesto
Breivik also made mention of the so­‑called Romani question, proposing reset‑
tlement of the Roma into Eastern Anatolia (Berwick 2011: 1307).
    All of the examples provided above fall into the definition of terrorism as
broadly understood, though the exact designation may be a matter for discus‑
sion. In the following three case studies, a clear terrorist element has been
identified in the form of intimidation by brutal violence, and this violence has
claimed human lives. Nevertheless it needs emphasizing that, of the three exam‑
ples, only the case of Franz Fuchs has been officially described as terrorism, in
the documents of the Austrian government (Republik Österreich. Bundesmin‑
isterium des Inneres 1999). At the time these acts were committed, there was
no law in force in Austria that directly described certain behavior as terrorist.
By contrast, the case from Hungary was not heard by the court as one involving
terrorism. The same is true for the case from Bulgaria, where, furthermore, the
real culprits remain to be convicted.

Case­‑study: Bomb attack on Roma in Austria in 1995
A bomb attack on Roma was committed on the night of 4/5 February 1995, near
the village of Oberwart in Burgenland, Austria. A tripwire explosive device was
attached to a sign stating “Roma back to India” (Roma zurück nach Indien), de‑
signed to look like a traffic sign and placed at a junction close to the municipality.
The item was discovered, apparently shortly after midnight, by four Roma, who
probably attempted to remove it. They were alleged to be members of a Roma

Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                             77

patrol, which at that time regularly monitored the situation around Oberwart,
as the local Romani population had faced threats there before (Ivan 2005). The
bomb, containing 400 g of TNT, exploded, instantly killing all four Roma: Josef
Simon (aged 40), Peter Sarközi (27), Karl Horvath (22) and Erwin Horvath
(18). They were found by the uncle of two of the victims, who called the police
(Tozzer – Zellsacher 1995: 163). The police initially suspected that a relative
of the murdered men had constructed the explosive device. However, the next
day a charge exploded in the town of Stinatz, largely inhabited by members of
the Croatian minority. Thanks to a letter connected to the second attack, both
bombings were ascribed to the Bajuwarische Befreiungsarmee (BBA) (Antifa‑
schistisches Autorenkollektiv 1996: 31).
   This putative organization was responsible for sending letter bombs and
placing explosives in Austria and Germany from 1993 to 1996. A total of 25 letter
bombs were sent in five lots, with an additional device dispatched in Decem‑
ber 1996. The attacks were committed in Klagenfurt (where the explosive was
uncovered by police officers in time), Oberwart and Stinsatz. The main victims
of the attacks were members of ethnic minorities, persons of foreign origin,
and public figures known for helping immigrants and minorities. Nine letters
claiming responsibility for the attacks were received (Republik Österreich.
Bundesministerium des Inneres 1999: 50). As the overview of the attacks below
shows, Roma were only attacked directly in Oberwart; they were, however, the
only group to have suffered fatalities as a consequence of the incidents.

Table 2: Attacks by the Bajuwarische Befreiungsarmee

Series/Attack     Date             Targets                          Results of the attacks
                                - August Janisch, pastor from Sty-
                                 ria involved in aid to refugees
                                - Helmut Zilk, then mayor of
                                 Vienna
                                - Helmut Schüller, head of the
                                 Church organization Caritas,
                                 which aids immigrants
                                - Silvana Meixner, ORF TV station Four wounded (Janich, Zilk,
                                 journalist for minorities         Meixner and the clerk at a law
                                - Wolfgang Gombocz, activist of office in Vienna who opened the
First series of
                  December 1993 the Slovenian cultural union in letter addressed to the Islamic
letter bombs
                                 Steiermark                        Immigration Aid Society), six of
                                - Madeleine Petrovic and Terezia the ten bombs were seized and
                                 Stoisits, two Green Party politi- defused.
                                 cians helping immigrants
                                - Johanna Dohnal, then minister
                                 for women
                                - ARGE (an association facilitat-
                                 ing the employment of foreign
                                 nationals)
                                - Islamic Immigration Aid Society



78                                                       Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

                                                                      Bomb found, exploded in the
                                  - Driving school in Klagenfurt      detector during the police inves-
Pipe bomb in
                   24 August 1994 (Slovenian, according to the        tigation. Three police officers
Klagenfurt
                                   perpetrator)                       were wounded; Theo Kelz lost
                                                                      both hands.
                                 - A publishing house in Kla-
                                  genfurt that issued works by
                                  Slovenian writers
                                 - Advisory centre for foreigners
Second series of                                                     All four bombs uncovered, no
                 October 1994     at the Dornbirn diocese
letter bombs                                                         injuries.
                                 - AG Papier Hallein factory (em-
                                  ployed foreigners)
                                 - The company Stift Wilten (help-
                                  ful to foreigners)
                                 - Inhabitants of a Romani settle- Four Roma killed: Josef Simon,
Pipe bomb in
                 4 February 1995 ment, bomb placed at nearby         Peter Sarközi, Karl Horvath and
Oberwart
                                  junction                           Erwin Horvath.
                                                                     Bomb exploded when waste
                                                                     container was being handled,
Explosive charge                 - Croatians from the village,
                 6 February 1995                                     seriously injuring employee of
in Stinatz                        bomb disguised as a spray can
                                                                     waste-disposal services Erich
                                                                     Preißler.
                                 - Arabella Kiesbauer, dark-
                                                                     Three people wounded
                                  skinned presenter of the TV
                                                                     (Kiesbauer and Szanmeit were
                                  station Pro 7 in Munich
Third series of                                                      unharmed, as the letter bombs
                 June 1995       - Intercontact, a mediatory
letter bombs                                                         were opened by their colleagues,
                                  agency in Linz
                                                                     Sabine Dammann in Munich and
                                 - Dietrich Szameit, deputy mayor
                                                                     Thomas Rhoter in Lübeck).
                                  in Lübeck
                                 - Maria Loley, refugee aid worker Two wounded (the aid worker
Fourth series of                 - Mahmoud Abou-Roumie, Syrian and the doctor; the bomb ad-
                 October 1995
letter bombs                      doctor                             dressed to the Korean couple
                                 - A medical couple from Korea       was intercepted).
                                 - Office of the United Nations
                                  High Commissioner for Refu-
                                  gees (UNHCR) in Vienna
                                 - An Indian family living in Vienna
                                 - A dating agency based in          Two bombs exploded in the mail-
Fifth series of
                 December 1995 Hungary                               box, wounding one passer-by;
letter bombs
                                 - Angela Resetarits, mother of      two others were intercepted.
                                  three sons of Croatian descent,
                                  who were well-known in cul-
                                  tural and media circles in favor
                                  of immigration
                                 - Lotte Ingrisch, writer, stepmoth-
The last letter
                 December 1996 er of the then-minister of the        Bomb intercepted and defused.
bomb
                                  interior, Caspar Einem
Sources: APA 2013, Republik Österreich. Bundesministerium des Inneres 1999, Tozzer – Zellsacher 1995.


Responsibility for the attacks was claimed by the putative group whose full
name was Salzburger Eidgenossenschaft – Bajuwarische Befreiungsarmee (The
Salzburg Confederation – Bajuvarian Liberation Army, BBA). Based on German
nationalist ideas, the, BBA promoted in its letters an ethnically pure German
Austria without foreigners and ethnic minorities. The name alluded to the


Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                                               79

 Germanic tribe of the Bajuvari, who, around the middle of the first millennium
 AD, settled in parts of what is today Bavaria and Austria. However, the letter
 writer also signed off using fictitious names referring to important figures from
 Austrian history, such as Odilo, the eighth­‑century fighter against the Slavs in
 Carinthia; Siegfried Mahrenberg, the thirteenth­‑century leader of the Styrian
 uprising against Přemysl Otakar II; Friedrich II der Streitbare, the thirteenth­
‑century ruler; Graf Ernst Rüdiger von Starhemberg, one of the victors over
 the Turks who laid siege to Vienna in 1683; and Andreas Hofer, the leader of
 a Tyrolean uprising at the time of the Napoleonic wars. One of the letters also
 questioned the holocaust of the Jews, calling it a fabrication (Tozzer – Zellsa‑
 cher 1995: 139–214).
    In the end only one perpetrator was apprehended. This occurred on 1 October
 1997 during a police check on a driver whom two women had accused of stalk‑
 ing them. Upon the arrival of the police, the driver detonated an improvised
 explosive device, losing both of his hands. The perpetrator was Franz Fuchs
 from Obergralla, Austria, born in 1949. At the time of his arrest, Fuchs was
 unemployed, his most recent job having been as a measurement technician. He
 suffered from emotional and psychological issues about his low social stand‑
 ing and his qualities being insufficiently appreciated. He had been unable to
 complete his university education due to a lack of funding. He did not have
 a permanent partner (he allegedly experienced issues during a relationship
 he had with a Slovenian woman) and suffered from sexual anxiety. He thought
 the termination of his last employment was unjust (Müller 2006: 34). He put
 the blame for his problems on foreigners and members of ethnic minorities.
    On 10 March 1999, Franz Fuchs was given a life sentence for the crimes of
 murder, attempted murder, grievous bodily harm, intentional endangering by
 explosives, aggravated blackmail, serious damage to property, and coercion of
 the federal parliament, the federal government, the Constitutional Court, the
 Supreme Administrative Court, or the Supreme Court, as well as the offence of
 coercion of Bundesland (Müller 2006: 33). On 26 December 2000, Fuchs com‑
 mitted suicide in prison.
    The official version was that Fuchs was the, BBA’s only member, but this has
 been called into question by various authors (Scheid 2001). Various conjectures
 exist as to Fuchs’s accomplices, and the possibility that he was merely a cover.
 With respect to anti­‑Romani terrorism, the version proposed by Ana Maria
 Ivan is interesting: she attributes the, BBA attacks as well as the bombing in
 Oberwart to operatives of the former Romanian secret service, Securitate. One
 of Ivan’s arguments is that in early June 1995 seven letter and parcel bombs
 were sent from Austria (Graz, Salzburg, Klagenfurt, and Innsbruck) to politi‑
 cians in Romania who were members of the Hungarian, German, and Romani
 minorities, including the Romani political activist Gheorge Nicolae. Ivan spoke
 with a relative of two of those murdered in Oberwart, who said that one woman

80                                             Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

had made threats to his family over the telephone. One of these two above
mentioned persons allegedly met Fuchs accidently in 1994, and spoke to him in
friendly terms and hence, supposedly, Fuchs had no reason to attack the Roma.
By contrast, there were apparently some individuals who were looking to resolve
disputes and had links with Romania (Ivan 2005). It needs to be emphasized
that this is unconfirmed speculation by one author; the sender of the letter and
parcel bombs from Austria to Romania was never apprehended, and the cases
of the, BBA (Fuchs) and this series of bombs were not linked, according to the
official investigation. Still, it is interesting that an anti­‑Romani element appears
in both, within the context of their broader targets of multiple ethnic minorities.
    Heeding now the official explanation, the case fell into a period of Aus‑
tria’s politics in which there was a substantial increase in anti­‑immigrant senti‑
ment, which was accompanied by the rise of the party­‑political extreme right.
At that time in Austria there was also a strongly militant extreme­‑right move‑
ment whose members were originally suspected of having committed the, BBA
attacks. The Romani question was not dominant in either the, BBA campaign
nor in Austrian politics of the time; yet memories of the attack remain evident
within Austria’s Romani community to this day. A memorial was erected at
the place of the Oberwart attack, and on its twentieth anniversary a number
of commemoration services for the victims were held at the site, some with
the participation of Austria’s President Heinz Fischer (Bundespräsident der
Republik Österreich 2015).

Case study: Death Squad in Hungary, 2008–2009
The series of attacks that claimed the most lives among the Roma was committed
by a group of racists in Hungary between 2008 and 2009. Though they issued
no proclamations, or even the name of their group (if they used a name, this
remains unknown), the media dubbed them the “Death Squad” (Halálbrigád),
or described the case as the “murders of the Roma” (Romagyilkosságok). The
group consisted of four individuals, Arpád Kiss, István Kiss, Zsolt Pető, and Ist‑
ván Csontos, who over the period of their group’s activities murdered six Roma
and exposed 55 people to clear physical danger. They fired 78 gunshots and
threw 11 Molotov cocktails at homes inhabited by Roma (Athena Institute 2013).
    The members of the group were activists of the extreme right for many years,
chiefly among the local skinhead movement in Debrecen. István Kiss took part
in a 1995 attack on a synagogue there, later becoming a member of the local
organization Bloody Sword (Véres Kard) and, subsequently, the Hungarian
section of the Hammerskins. Arpád Kiss participated in events organized by
Blood & Honour in Budapest. István Csontos was a former soldier; he was
involved in the Kosovo mission, where he also acted as an agent of military in‑
telligence, his task being to report potential unrest among soldiers (Vágvölgyi

Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                            81

2014: 4). Otherwise the perpetrators had ordinary jobs (sound engineer, cook
and pastry cook). The attacks were planned from Debrecen and the targets
chosen throughout Hungary (K. B. I. 2013). According to the information avail‑
able, the plan of the four was to incite retaliation from the Roma against ethnic
Hungarians, thus provoking a civil war in the country in which the Roma would
be exterminated (Mareš – Tvrdá 2014: 12).
    The perpetrators planned their attacks, in several cases, reconnoitering
sites in advance. They used maps and satellite imagery, choosing some targets
at random and others according to media reports, including those where there
was increased tension between the Roma and the majority. They would drive to
their destination, leaving their car parked at some distance and continuing on
foot; then they would attack and withdraw. The attacks were mostly carried out
at night, and the perpetrators used night­‑vision equipment. They started with
attacks on property—though even in these there was the possibility of injuring
or killing people—later shifting to purposeful murderous assaults on people.
The group was very interested in how its activities were presented in the media,
and this also contributed to the escalation of the group’s violence (Kuria 2016,
Vágvölgyi 2014).

Table 3: List of attacks committed by the Death Squad in Hungary
Place           Date            Description of attack               Consequences
Besenyszög      7 March 2008    Brothers Kiss and Pető robbed       Seven hunting weapons stolen.
                                the house of Csaba G., a profes-
                                sional hunter.
 Debrecen       2 June 2008     Brothers Kiss and Pető fired        Bullet hole in a window, one
                                two shots at a refugee camp         inhabitant slightly injured.
                                from a distance of 260 meters.
 Galgagyörk     20 June 2008    Brothers Kiss and Pető fired        Damage to property, lives of
                                shots at houses in the Romani       several Roma put at risk.
                                part of the municipality.
 Piricse        7 August 2008   Brothers Kiss and Pető threw        One Romani woman injured,
                                Molotov cocktails and shot at       damage to property, lives of
                                two Romani houses.                  several Roma put at risk.
 Nyíradony-     4 September     Arpád Kiss fired shots at a         Damage to property, lives of
 Tamásipuszta   2008            house inhabited by Roma.            about ten Roma put at risk.
 Tarnabod       28 September    Brothers Kiss and Pető threw        Damage to property, lives in
                2008            a Molotov cocktail at a house       danger (contrary to the expec-
                                and fired shots at several          tations of the perpetrators,
                                others.                             the houses shot at were not
                                                                    inhabited by Roma).
 Nagycsécs      2 November      Brothers Kiss and Pető threw        Two casualties (József Nagy and
                2008            two Molotov cocktails and shot      F. Nagy), one seriously injured
                                at two Romani houses.               (Tibor Nagy), lives of other
                                                                    Roma in danger, damage to
                                                                    property.



82                                                      Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

 Alsózsolca        15 December        Brothers Kiss shot at several      One injured with lasting conse-
                   2008               Roma near their home.              quences (Krisztián Rontó).
 Tatárszent-       23 February        Brothers Kiss and Pető threw       Father Róbert Csorba and his
 györgy            2009               two Molotov cocktails and shot     young son shot dead; mother
                                      at a house and also shot at peo-   and daughter Bianka Csorba
                                      ple leaving the property.          seriously injured, two other
                                                                         family members in danger and
                                                                         hospitalized.
 Tiszalök          22 April 2009      Brothers Kiss and Csontos          Jenő Kóka shot dead.
                                      (for the first time) opened
                                      fire through the window of a
                                      Romani house.
 Kisléta           2 August 2009      Brothers Kiss, Pető and Csontos    Maria Balogh shot dead, her 13-
                                      assaulted a Romani house,          year old daughter Tímea Pótor
                                      shooting at two victims.           seriously injured.

Sources: Kuria 2016, Vágvölgyi 2014


 After a lengthy investigation, and apparently with the aid of the FBI, the per‑
 petrators were apprehended on 21 August 2009 at a discotheque in Debrecen;
 weapons and munitions were found in an adjacent building (Vágvölgyi 2014:
 9). On 6 August 2013, Arpád Kiss, István Kiss and Zsolt Pető were handed life
 sentences, István Csontos a 13-year prison sentence. A court of appeals upheld
 the verdict on 8 May 2015 and on 13 January 2016 Hungary’s Supreme Court
 affirmed the life sentences for brothers Kiss and Pető (Kúria 2016). However,
 the judgments were handed down for murders, not for acts of terrorism, for
 which there was no provision in Hungarian criminal law at the time. The victims
 were awarded compensation by the state (Vágvölgyi 2014: 11).
     The case occurred at a time of heightened tension between the majority popu‑
 lace and the Romani minority, at the turn of the first and second decade of the
 twenty­‑first century. This period was also characterized by the rise of the party­
‑political extreme right in Hungary and, in particular, by the public activities
 of extreme­‑right paramilitary groups such as the Hungarian Guard. Although
 outlawed in 2009, this group spawned successor organizations. At the same
 time, paramilitary units were active in other countries of Central Europe and in
 the Balkans (Stojarová 2014). Nevertheless, a connection between the murders
 of the Roma and the Hungarian Guard or other paramilitary organizations was
 not proven. Since Roma were the Death Squad’s primary target, the murders
 and the wider context of events seriously intimidated the Roma population in
 Hungary and were watched with apprehension by Romani activists throughout
 Europe (Pape 2016).




Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                                                83

Case study: Bomb attack against Euroroma party offices in
Bulgaria in 2012
A case that bears the external signs of terrorism, but where no perpetrator was
clearly identified, occurred in the town of Sandaski, Bulgaria on 29 July 2012.
A bomb was planted outside the office of the Euroroma party and exploded.
As the European Roma Rights Centre reported, the bomb “fatally injur[ed]
59-year­‑old Malin Iliev.”
   “On the day in question, Mr Iliev found a suspicious package and went to
move it when it blew up in his hands. He was hospitalised and died a couple of
days later. Investigations led to the arrest of four men who belonged to local
nationalist groups. According to media reports, they left letters at the party
headquarters before the attack, expressing their hatred of Roma.” (European
Roma Rights Centre 2012a).
    Founded in 1998, the Euroroma party focuses on defending Romani rights,
though it also counts ethnic Turks and Bulgarians among its members (Albert
2012). Although it gradually became one of the most influential Romani parties
in Bulgaria, it has not been able to poll a serious share of the vote in parlia‑
mentary elections. As in other countries, the placing of Romani candidates on
the lists of ordinary parties has proved a much more viable strategy in Bulgaria
(Pečínka 2009: 46–50). The Euroroma party did, however, score some successes
at the local level, including the Sandanski municipality (Albert 2012).
    Shortly after the attacks, four young Bulgarian nationalists, Stojan S., Alek‑
sandr A., Vasil G. and Nikolaj J. were accused of attempted murder. They were
held in custody until 2013 and later investigated at liberty. However, as far as
available information indicates, the case has not yet been judicially resolved.
All four accused denied guilt and a campaign was mounted in their support
(Bulgarski Nacionalni Sojuz 2014). In March 2014 court proceedings started in
Blagoevgrad, but—according to the information available—the court has not yet
arrived at a judgment. During the trial it transpired that the charges were based
on information provided by a police informer, which the counsel for the defense
disputed (Apostolova 2014). In January 2015, the former boss of the fan club
of the CSKA Moscow football club supported the accused in court (BLIC 2015).
    Whereas the attack itself was widely reported in Bulgaria and the world, in‑
formation about the results of the trial is scarce (despite efforts by the author
to obtain information from Bulgarian police experts on extremism). Sources
from within the Bulgarian extreme right indicate that the trial continued in
2015 (Alter Media 2015).
    The case needs to be understood in the context of escalated anti­‑Romani at‑
titudes in Bulgaria and prior anti­‑Romani violence in the country. Things came
to a head in the summer of 2011, when a wave of anti­‑Romani demonstrations
occurred, spurred by the controversial behavior of the members of one Romani

84                                            Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

clan. According to NGO reports, at least 22 people were attacked in Bulgaria in
the space of a year, of which three died (European Roma Rights Center 2012a).
   In this atmosphere, the attack on the office of a party known for its defense
of Romani rights had a strong symbolic resonance. The attack attracted inter‑
national attention and Romani political organizations protested forcefully
(Albert 2012). The site of the attack, its execution and consequences indicate
that its purpose was to send a threatening message. Even if actual perpetrators
are not convicted, the connection of this attack with extreme­‑right circles is
highly probable, given the previous threatening letters sent to Euroroma in
Sanadanski.

Evaluation
As the analysis of three main identified cases of terrorism against the Roma
indicates, their aim was to intimidate the Romani population by attacks on
selected members of this ethnic group or nation. The campaign of the Death
Squad in Hungary was the most intensive and incurred the greatest number of
casualties; the greatest loss of lives in a single attack was, however, recorded
in the Oberwart, Austria, atrocity.
    If we take into account Schmidt’s criteria (Schmid 2011: 74), we can apply
the majority of them to the above­‑analyzed cases of anti­‑Romani terrorism.
The demonstrative use of violence against human beings is typical of all three
cases, and the conditional threat of more violence is also included in these
acts. Symbolism of these activities and clear intentions against Romani people
are connected with the criterion of deliberate production of terror or fear in
the target group. Targets of the terrorism were civilians and innocents. The
purpose was intimidation and propaganda, despite the fact that Death Squad
and Hungarian perpetrators did not publish their statements. However, these
acts were by perpetrators perceived as part of a racial or ethnic conflict, and
they were used for communication with a broader audience (including media
attention). All cases researched were illegal/criminal acts. They were primarily
politically motivated, because right­‑wing extremist ethnic or racial hate are seri‑
ous political issues. The elements of psychological warfare to mobilize sectors
of the public against Romani people are very likely also in the cases of the, BBA
and the Death Squad; in the attack in Bulgaria it is not clear (more evidence is
needed for this argument).
    In terms of selectivity, Fuchs chose a site close to a Romani settlement where
Roma were expected to be present; the Death Squad attacked several Romani
homes and persons who were in their vicinity; and in Bulgaria the office of a po‑
litical party connected with the Romani minority was attacked. The selection
of targets according to the ethnic origin is typical of all three cases; however,
in Bulgaria we can see a higher selectivity focused on a political party (this is

Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                          85

 a specific actor of Roma representation consisting of politically active members
 of the Roma community).
     Whereas the attack in Bulgaria appears to be a one­‑off, in Austria and Hun‑
 gary they were parts of campaigns. Although in Austria a Romani target was
 chosen only once, the, BBA campaign was also aimed against people aiding mi‑
 norities, and, BBA letters contained anti­‑Romani diatribes (Tozzer – Zellsacher
 1995). In Hungary, Roma were the main target, with the exception of the attack
 on the refugee camp. An ideological background can be identified particularly
 clearly in the case of the, BBA, which espoused pronounced German­‑Austrian
 nationalism and racism. In Hungary and Bulgaria, the perpetrators of the at‑
 tacks issued no proclamations, but in Bulgaria the Euroroma party had been
 threatened previously. In Hungary, the function of the acts appears to have been
 propaganda, where the message is contained in the choice of targets and the
 execution of the attacks.
     In Hungary one may speculate about neo­‑Nazi connections of the perpetra‑
 tors on the basis of their pasts. As far as the suspects in the case in Bulgaria are
 concerned, they were strong nationalists with possible neo­‑Nazi links. Ideologi‑
 cally, all three attacks can be classified as right­‑wing extremism, though it needs
 to be emphasized that in Bulgaria the accused have not been convicted, and it
 is uncertain whether they were the perpetrators.
     If these cases of anti­‑Romani violence are evaluated in terms of Sprinzak’s cri‑
 teria, the, BBA and Death Squad campaigns can be placed on the borderline
 between revolutionary and racist terrorism. If the version proposed by investi‑
 gators is confirmed in Bulgaria, that case can be defined largely as countercul‑
 tural terrorism. Given how the Romani minority is perceived, the presence of
 vigilantism can be considered in all three campaigns.
     In sum, we can subsume the campaign of the, BBA as a form of lone­‑wolf ter‑
 rorism (if we accept the official version) with a specific ultra­‑nationalist, right­
‑wing extremist background, aimed against a broader set of targets (including
 the Romani people). Death Squad in Hungary was a systematic campaign of
 a well­‑organized and equipped small cell (probably with a neo­‑Nazi background,
 with elements of Hungarian national socialist legacy). The Romani people were
 the main targets of the campaign in Hungary (despite the fact that it started
 with an action against a refugee camp). In Bulgaria the bomb attack was a single
 action (it could be the start of a campaign; however, there is no clear evidence of
 this), probably connected with a small group, which arose from the subcultural
 right­‑wing extremist milieu. As this article shows, the anti­‑Roma terrorism can
 be identified in very different forms.




86                                               Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

References
Albert, Gwendolyn (2012): Bulgaria: Man dies as result of bombing of Euroroma office, Romea 1
  August 2012, http://www.romea.cz/en/news/world/bulgaria­‑man­‑dies­‑as­‑result­‑of­‑bombing­
 ‑of­‑euroroma­‑office (14 October 2014).
Alter Media (2015): Deloto za bombata v snadanski skalypen proces, http://www.altermedia.
  bg/news/view/261/deloto­‑za­‑bombata­‑v-sandanski­‑skalypen­‑proces, 23 March 2015 (20 De-
  cember 2015).
Amnesty International (2014): “We ask for justice,” Europe’s failure to protect Roma from
 racist violence, http://www.amnesty.eu/content/assets/Reports/08042014_Europes_fail-
 ure_to_protect_Roma_from_racist_violence.pdf (12 October 2014).
Antifaschistisches Autorenkollektiv (1996): Drahtzieher im braunen Netz. Ein aktueller Überblick
  über den Neonazi­‑Untergrund in Deutschland und Österreich, Konkret Literatur Verlag.
APA (2013): Franz Fuchs: Die Chronologie des Bomben­‑Terrors, Salzburger Nachrichten, 3
  December 2013: http://www.salzburg.com/nachrichten/oesterreich/politik/sn/artikel/franz­
 ‑fuchs­‑die­‑chronologie­‑des­‑bomben­‑terrors-85059/ (4 June 2014).
Apostolova, Vetina (2014): Kriminalniyat razuznavach B. Vasilev. Informator na policiyata posochi
  chetirimata arestuvani za bombata pred ofisa na Evroroma v Sandanski, Struma, 26 June
  2014, http://struma.bg/news/26446/1/1/Kriminalniyat­‑razuznavach­‑B-Vasilev­‑Informator­‑na­
 ‑policiyata­‑posochi­‑chetirimata­‑arestuvani­‑za­‑bombata­‑pred­‑ofisa­‑na­‑Evroroma­‑v-Sandanski.
  html (14 October 2014).
Athena Institute (2013): Identified domestic extremist groups, available at http://www.athe-
  naintezet.hu/en/hate_groups/ (20 October 2014).
Backes, Uwe (2012): Formen und Transnationale Netze im Vergleich. Rechtsterroristische Kristal-
  lisationsfelder in Europa. Politische Studien 63 (443): 56–67.
Bundespräsident des Republik Österreich (2015): Erinnerung an das Oberwart­‑Attentat 1995 und
  die vier Opfer von Hass und Diskriminierung, http://www.bundespraesident.at/newsdetail/
  artikel/-dc2ee14e6c/ (20 December 2015).
François­‑Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and Human Rights at Harvard University (2014):
  Accelerating patterns of anti­‑Roma violence in Hungary, https://cdn2.sph.harvard.edu/
  wp­‑content/uploads/sites/5/2014/02/FXB­‑Hungary­‑Report_Released­‑February-4-2014.pdf
  (accessed 20 December 2015).
Berwick, Andrew (2011). 2083 – A European Declaration of Independence, De Laude Novae Militae.
BLIC (2015): Duceto izrigina v syda na deloto za bombenija atentat v Sandanski, 28 January 2015,
  http://www.blitz.bg/news/article/316299.
Bötticher, Astrid – Mareš, Miroslav (2012): Extremismus. Theorien – Konzepte – Formen, Old-
  enbourg Verlag.
Bötticher, Astrid – Mareš, Miroslav (2013): Europaweite militante rechtsextremistische Netzwerke
  und Organisationen. Kriminalistik, 67 (10): 602–609.
Breen—Smyth, Marie (2009): Racism and violence in Northern Ireland: Romanian Roma
  driven out of Belfast, e­‑International Relations, July 1st 2009, available at http://www.e­‑ir.

Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                                          87

  info/2009/07/01/racism­‑and­‑violence­‑in­‑northern­‑ireland­‑romanian­‑roma­‑families­‑driven­
 ‑out­‑of­‑belfast/ (11 October 2014).
Bulgarski Nacionalni Sojuz (2014): Vazhno. Kampania: Objektivnost za momtseeta ot Sandanski,
  12 July 2012, available at http://bgns.net (12 October 2014).
European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (2012): Roma people in Europe in the
  21st century: violence, exclusion, insecurity, available at: http://www.aedh.eu/plugins/fckedi-
  tor/userfiles/file/Discriminations%20et%20droits%20des%20minorit%C3%A9s/AEDH%20
  Roma%20REPORT%2017_4_2013(1).pdf (13 July 2014).
European Roma Rights Center (2012b): Attacks against Roma in Bulgaria: September 2011–Sep-
  tember 2012, available at: http://www.errc.org/cms/upload/file/attacks­‑list­‑in­‑bulgaria.pdf
  (13 July 2014).
European Roma Rights Center (2012a): Attacks against Roma in Hungary: January 2008–Sep-
  tember 2012, available at: http://www.errc.org/cms/upload/file/attacks­‑list­‑in­‑hungary.pdf
  (13 July 2014).
European Roma Rights Center (2012c): Factsheet: Roma Rights in Jeopardy, available at http://
  www.errc.org/cms/upload/file/factsheet­‑roma­‑rights­‑record.pdf (13 July 2014).
European Union (2015): EU and Roma, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/discrimination/
  roma/index_en.htm (20 December 2015).
Graborsky, Peter – Stohl, Michael (2010): Crime and Terrorism, Sage.
Hartleb, Florian (2013): “Einsamer­‑Wolf­‑Terrorismus” – Neue Dimension oder drastischer Einzel-
 fall? Was lernen wir aus dem Fall “Breivik” in Norwegen? SIAK­‑Journal 9 (4), 77–95: available
 at 21 June 2014, available at: http://www.bmi.gv.at/cms/BMI_SIAK/4/2/1/2013/ausgabe_4/
 files/Hartleb_4_2013.pdf (12 January 2015).
Human Right Firsts (2008): 2008 Hate Crimes Survey, Human Rights Firsts.


Holbrook, Donald and Taylor, Max (2013): Introduction, in Holbrook, Donald – Currie, P. M and
 Taylor, M., eds., Extreme Right­‑Wing Political Violence and Terrorism, 1–13, Bloomsbury.
Ivan, Ana Maria (2005): Securitate Austria, available at http://www.ami25.at/securitate­‑austria/
  index.php (20 December 2014).
Jakoubek, Marek (2008): Geneze Romů a Baršova ontologie per acclamationem aneb Debata
  pokračuje. In Jakoubek, Marek and Budilová, Lenka, eds.: Romové a Cikáni – Neznámí i známí.
  Interdisciplinární pohled, 257–288, Leda.
Juříček, Ludvík – Rožňák, Petr (2014): Bezpečnost, hrozby a rizika v 21. století. Key Publishing.
K. B. I. (2013): Háromszor Életfogytiglan. Zsaru, 14. August 2013, 4–5.
Kraus, Josef (2014): Íránský státní terorismus, Centrum pro studium demokracie a kultury.
Kučera, Michal (2011): Les violences contre les Roms en République tchéque. Revue des sciences
  sociales 46 (1): 102–113.
Kúria (2016): A Kúria pontot tett az egész országot felkavaró ügyre, 13 January 2016, available at
  http://lb.hu/hu/sajto/kuria­‑pontot­‑tett­‑az­‑egesz­‑orszagot­‑felkavaro­‑ugyre (17 January 2016).



88                                                       Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

Laryš, Martin –Mareš, Miroslav (2015): Right­‑Wing Extremist Violence in the Russian Federation.
  Europe­‑Asia Studies 63 (1): 129–154.
Laqueur, Walter (2001): The New Terrorism. Fanaticism and the Arms of Mass Destruction,
  Phoenix Press.
Mareš, Miroslav (2005): Terorismus v ČR. Brno: Centrum strategických studií.
Mareš, Miroslav (2011): Terrorism­‑Free Zone in East Central Europe? Strategic Environment,
 Risk Tendencies, and Causes of Limited Terrorist Activities in the Visegrad Group Countries.
 Terrorism and Political Violence 23 (2): 233–253.
Mareš, Miroslav (2012):Vigilantism against the Roma in East Central Europe, in Backes, Uwe and
 Moreau, Patrick, eds.: The Extreme Right in Europe. Current Trends and Perspectives, 281–296,
 Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Mareš, Miroslav (2014): Leadership and Right­‑Wing Extremist Violence: Case Studies from the
 Czech Territory. In Milosevic Marko and Rekawek Kacper, eds: Perseverance of Terrorism: Focus
 on Leaders, 103–110, IOS Press.
Mareš, Miroslav – Tvrdá, Kateřina (2014): New forms of manifestation of extremist violence: Case
 study of East Central Europe. In Poczik, Szilveszter (ed.): Annual EENeT Conference 2012 in
 Budapest/HU. New Catalysts for Violent Extremism and Terrorism – Smoke on the Horizon?,
 11–15, European Expert Network on Terrorism Issues.
Martin, Gus (2013): Understanding Terrorism. Challenges, Perspectives and Issues, 3rd Edition,
 Sage.
Martón, Peter (2011): Anti­‑terrorism in the Visegrad Framework: Less is More and Better. In
  Rękawek Kacper, eds.: Non­‑military aspects of security in V4 countries —prospects for co­
 ‑operation, Polski Instytut Spraw Międzynarodowych, 11–25, available at https://www.pism.
  pl/files/?id_plik=8600 (13 April 2013).
Mayer, Gregor – Odehnal, Bernhard (2010): Aufmarsch. Die Rechte Gefahr aus Osteuropa. Res-
 idenz Verlag.


McAuley, James W (2013): Ulster Loyalist and Extreme Right­‑Wing Politics. In Taylor, Max – Cur-
 rie, P. M. and Holbrook, Donald (eds.): Extreme Right­‑Wing Political Violence and Terrorism,
 85–103, Bloomsbury.
Mudde, Cas (2005): Central and Eastern Europe Racist Extremism in Central and Eastern Europe,
 in Mudde, Cas: Racist Exremism in Central and Eastern Europe, 267–285, Routledge.
Müller, Thomas (2006): Einführung in die kriminalpsychologische Tatortanalyse. Fallbeispiel
 der Bajuwarischen Befreiungsarmee (BBA) (Teil 3), SIAK­‑Journal, 3 (3), 30–3, available at:
 http://www.bmi.gv.at/cms/BMI_SIAK/4/2/1/2006/ausgabe_3/files/Mueller_3_2006.pdf (12
 January 2015).
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (2014): Situation Assessment Report on
  Roma in Ukraine and the Impact of Current Crisis. (20 December 2015), https://www.osce.org/
  odihr/124494?download=true.




Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                                      89

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (2015): Bias against Roma and Sinti (20
  December 2015), http://hatecrime.osce.org/what­‑hate­‑crime/bias­‑against­‑roma­‑and­‑sinti.
Pape, Markus (2016): Analýza: Verdikt maďarského soudu je pravomocný. Za rasistické vraždy
  potvrdil doživotní tresty, Romea, 17 January 2016, available at http://www.romea.cz/cz/zpra-
  vodajstvi/verdikt­‑madarskeho­‑soudu­‑je­‑pravomocny­‑za­‑rasisticke­‑vrazdy­‑potvrdil­‑dozivotni­
 ‑tresty (17 January 2016).
Pečínka, Pavel (2009): Romské strany a politici v Evropě, Doplněk.
Policie České republiky (2011): Shromáždění nebylo oznámené, http://www.policie.cz/clanek/
  shromazdeni­‑nebylo­‑oznamene.aspx (12 June 2013).
Ravndal, Jacob Aasland (2015): Thugs or Terrorists? A Typology of Right­‑Wing Extremism and
  Violence in Western Europe. Journal for Deradicalisation 1 (3): 1: available at http://journals.
  sfu.ca/jd/index.php/jd/article/view/16 (20 December 2015).
Republik Österreich. Bundesministerium des Inneres (1999): Staatsschutzbericht 1998, avail-
  able at http://www.bmi.gv.at/cms/bmi_verfassungsschutz/verfassungsschutzbericht_1998.
  pdf (14 January 2015).
Scheid, Hans­‑Christian (2001): Franz Fuchs—Doch kein Einzeltäter, Styria Premium.
Schmid, Alex P. (2011): The Definition of Terrorism, in Schmid, Alex P., eds: The Routledge Hand‑
  book of Terrorism Research, 39–98, Routledge.
Souleimanov, Emil (2006): Terorismus ve světle geneze ideologie a technologie soudobých
  konfliktů, in Souleimanov, Emil, eds.: Terorismus. Válka proti státu, 13–63, Eurolex.
Sprinzak, Ehud (1995): Right­‑Wing Terrorism in a Comparative Perspective: The Case of Split
  Delegitimization, in Bjørgo, Tjore, eds.: Terror From the Extreme Right, 17–43, Frank Cass.
Stojarová, Věra (2014): The Far Rigt in the Balkans, Manchester University Press.
Strmiska, Maxmilián (2001): Terorismus a demokracie. Pojetí a typologie subverzivního teroris‑
  tického násilí v soudobých demokraciích, Masarykova univerzita.
Tozzer, Kurt and Zelsacher, Günter (1995): Bombenspuren. Briefbomben und politischer Terror.
  Holzhausen.
Transnational Terrorism, Security & Rule of Law (2008): 20th Century Right Wing Groups in
  Europe. Prone to Extremism or Terrorism?, COT Institute for Safety, Security and Crisis Manage-
  ment: available at http://www.transnationalterrorism.eu/tekst/publications/Rightwing%20
  terrorism.pdf (7 June 2013).
UN Security Council (2004): UN Security Council Resolution 1566 (2004), available at http://
 daccess­‑dds­‑ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N04/542/82/PDF/N0454282.pdf?OpenElement (6
 June 2013).
United States Department of State (2013): Country Reports on Terrorism 2012, available at:
 http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/210204.pdf (6 June 2013).
Vágvölgyi, András B. (2014): Diskopartisanen. Eine Serie von Terroranschlägen und die Rolle
  von Justizwesen, Gesellschaft und Medien in Ungarn, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, available at:
  http://library.fes.de/pdf­‑files/dialog/10958.pdf (20 December 2014).



90                                                       Anti­‑Romani Terrorism in Europe   Miroslav Mareš

Vejvodová, Petra (2014): Transnational Forms of Contemporary Neo­‑Nazi Activity in Europe from
  the Perspective of Czech Neo­‑Nazis, Muni Press.
Yıldız, Yeşim Yaprak (2015): Nowhere to Turn: The Situation of Dom Refugees from Syria in
  Turkey, European Roma Rights Centre, available at http://kemalvuraltarlan.tripod.com/we-
   bonmediacontents/nowhere­‑to­‑turn­‑september-2015.pdf (20 December 2015).



Miroslav Mareš (1974) is professor at the Department of Political Science, Faculty
of Social Studies Masaryk University. He is guarantee of the study program Security
and Strategic Studies and researcher of the International Institute of Political Science.
He focuses on the research of political violence and extremism, namely in the Central
European context. He is a chair of the subgroup Right­‑wing, left­‑wing and separatist
terrorism of the European Expert Network on Terrorism Issues (EENeT) and member
of the editorial board of the Radicalisation Awareness Network (RAN) in the EU
(2015–2016). He is a co­‑author (with Astrid Bötticher) of the book Extremismus (in
German) and author or co­‑author more than 200 scientific articles, chapters and
books. E­‑mail: mmares@fss.muni.cz




Politics in Central Europe 12 (2016) 2                                                     91

