Articles


Media Discourse on Jihadist Terrorism in Europe
by Sybille Reinke de Buitrago

Keywords: Media discourse, jihadist terrorism, Westergaard, Yemen cargo plot, Stockholm attack,
motivations, symbolic offences, attack type

Abstract
This article analyses the manner in which European print media discuss jihadist terrorism in
Europe. It presents key results from a qualitative analysis of media discourse following three
selected attacks in seven European countries in 2010: the attack on the cartoonist Westergaard, the
Yemen cargo plane plot, and the Stockholm suicide attack. The article finds that attack type is a
factor shaping media discourse across different media in Europe.

Introduction




T       he article aims to shed light on how European print media discuss jihadist terrorist attacks in
        Europe. Using a qualitative media analysis, it finds that attack type shapes discourse across
        different media in Europe: the Westergaard case led to a value-oriented discourse, the
Yemen cargo plane plot to a discourse of control, and the Stockholm attack to a broader and less
defined discourse. Analysing media reflection of terrorist acts is significant due to media generating
attention to these acts (Combs 2013) and news frames impacting interpretation (Entman, 2010,
1993; Goffman, 1974).
Terrorist attacks receive notable media attention, and media have considerable influence in shaping
interpretation of such acts and the reactions to them. The media role can be seen in terms of an
active and a passive quality, although both also mingle. In a more passive role media reflect
respective societal and political views on terrorism. These views are shaped by norms and values
and become concrete in the interpretations, reactions and proposed policies. In this light, media
discourse illustrates a society’s national self-image (see also Boulding, 1996; Scott, 1965). The
mingling of the passive and active qualities materializes in the national image providing historical
frames for the interpretation and framing of current events (see also Le, 2006: 10-12). Actively
then, media communicate about terrorism with the intention to inform, and to sell. Here, we also
find media competition, a resulting tendency to sensationalize and a need for resonance (Sutter,
2010: 17).
A constructivist perspective of the creation of social reality via communication and interaction (see
also Berger and Luckmann, 1968; Katzenstein, Keohane and Krasner, 1998; Wiener, 2006) allows
to further consider language’s contribution to our understanding of an issue and the remedies we
                                  JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                              3

find appropriate and necessary. Via a particular coverage of events media contribute to social
reality, public opinion and partly policy. The impact of language on interpretation of information in
media is found in news frames. Frames refer to the definition of an issue or situation, a process that
is shaped by our organizational principles (Goffman, 1974: 10 ff.). Something is thus framed in a
specific manner and linked with certain values. News frames in media discourse then facilitate
certain interpretations (Entman, 2010, 1993; Goffman, 1974: 21). This framing process is complex
(de Vreese, 2005), but also effective due to humans processing information with the least effort
possible, by using mental short-cuts and filters (see also Fiske and Taylor, 1991). Framing explains
the link of media, public opinion and policy, also shown in numerous studies (for example Entman,
2010; Glaab, 2007a; Linsky, 1986; Lomax Cook et al., 1983; Nacos, Boch-Elkon and Shapiro,
2011; Pritchard, 1992; Puglisi, 2004). Thus, as writers and editors interpret the world as they see it
and thereby contribute to public discourse, media become an active player (Sutter: 34, 44). An
example of this is media discourse on left-wing terrorism in Europe in the 1970s and 1980s.
Regarding the RAF, German media highlighted either the group’s political demands or their
criminal nature, depending on own political leaning and temporal development (Glaab, 2007b).
Media discourse then often exaggerated the ability of left-wing terrorist groups in Germany as well
as in Italy to affect the state (Hess, 2006, 1988).

Scope of Article
This article is based on results of a research project in Germany in cooperation with research
institutes in France, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Turkey and the UK (see also author footnote). For the
media analysis, three jihadist attacks were selected – all in 2010 for a comparable context. They
differ in targets, means and damage: the attack on Danish cartoonist Kurt Westergaard on January 1,
2010, the Yemen cargo plane plot on October 29, 2010, and the Stockholm suicide attack on
December 11, 2010. In the Westergaard case, a 28-year old Somali Muslim with a Danish staying
permit forcibly entered Westergaard’s house and tried to kill him with an axe in revenge for the
Muhammad cartoons. Westergaard was already under police protection due to earlier threats and
could flee to his ‘panic room’ and alert police. The attacker was brought into custody. In the Yemen
cargo plane plot, printers with pentaerythritol tetranitrate explosives were discovered in U.S.-bound
planes during stop-overs in the UK and Dubai. While no explosion occurred, the plot raised great
alarm in Europe and beyond; the likely target was an explosion over American soil. Al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula took responsibility. In the Stockholm case, the 28-year old Iraqi offender who
had lived in Sweden and then moved to the UK ignited a car bomb and then tried to ignite his
explosives belt. It went off early, killed himself and hurt two bystanders. He likely planned to target
a large crowd in central Stockholm.
These attacks were analysed in two major national newspapers of each of the seven countries for a
period of three weeks after the attack: Germany: Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung & Süddeutsche
Zeitung; France: Le Monde & Le Parisien; Italy: Corriere della Sera & La Repubblica; Netherlands:
Volkskrant & NRC Handelsblad; Spain: El País & El Mundo; Turkey: Hürriyet & Sabah; and UK:
Financial Times & The Guardian. Their circulation and standing make the selected papers


                                  JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                              4

representative of and a trendsetter for national print media. The inclusion of seven countries allows
a broad comparison and, with Turkey, goes beyond a purely Western European discourse.
The media analysis was conducted as qualitative content analysis. Previous research on terrorist
communication and media discourse on terrorist acts led to thematic categories, or news frames,
which were sufficiently broad to capture all relevant content and sufficiently specific to allow for
nuances. They are: coverage (number of articles overall and front pages); offender motives,[1]
messages and causes of jihadist terrorism; evaluation of topics of jihadist interest such as Western
troop presence in predominantly Muslim countries (e.g. Afghanistan, Iraq),[2] symbolic offences
(e.g. Muhammad cartoons), and relations between Europe/the West and the Muslim world/Islam;
and major policy reactions reported (legislation, surveillance, technical measures, social measures
and foreign policy).
Due to space limitations, only key results are presented. As national media discourse shows a
frequent convergence, the article often gives results at national media level (referring to national
media or cooperation partners’ reports, e.g. French media, UK Report). Results from specific news
sources are presented for illustration or to show minority opinions. For better understanding, the
article refers to the term of jihadist terrorist for specific meaning and the term of terrorist for general
meaning. This is also grounded in the analysed media discourse not distinguishing between
terrorists and jihadist terrorists. Further, the article speaks of attacks and not attempted attacks
because of the significant impact on media discourse and partly policy.

Coverage
Regarding the coverage of the attacks in media, the Westergaard case received the least attention.
The Yemen case received the greatest attention, both in the number of articles and cover pages, with
the Stockholm case a close second. Only in Turkish media, Stockholm clearly came before Yemen.
Regarding the use of photographs, all cases were reported with photos, although not all of the direct
attack scene. The distribution of articles in the period of analysis was very similar for the attacks:
few and short articles in the first two days, as facts are still gathered; then longer and more detailed
articles for about two weeks, as facts and policy measures are discussed; finally, subsiding but also
reflective coverage that includes a wider context. However, among national newspapers, German
newspapers showed the greatest coverage; only regarding Yemen, amount of national coverage was
more similar.
What does coverage tell us? The Westergaard case received the least attention, possibly because
there had been much coverage of Westergaard already for the publication of his and other
cartoonists’ cartoons, the topic of Westergaard not being entirely new. The Yemen case received the
most attention, since here we had a terrorist group exploiting security gaps in air cargo transport,
the incident both having international impact and calling on international cooperation. Media
attention could further be explained by the U.S. having been the target and the UK role in the plot’s
discovery. In the Stockholm case the material damage and human casualties would have been much
larger, had the offender succeeded as likely planned. Such damage potential obviously raises much
alarm.

                                   JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                                 5

The Impact of Attack Type on Discourse in European Print Media
The Westergaard Case
All national media report on the offender motivation and message of revenge for Westergaard’s
cartoons, which were seen as blasphemous and offensive by many Muslims. Also mentioned is Al
Qaeda having called for the killing of such cartoonists. An apparent link between the offender and a
terrorist network such as Al Qaeda in East Africa or the Somali terrorist group Al-Shabaab is
generally debated though – most media focus on the lone offender (France Report; Germany
Report; Netherlands Report; Spain Report). The label that national media give to the offender is
mostly that of terrorist, while the label of Islamic extremism also figures in the background. The
offender’s biographical factors such as upbringing or education are not discussed.
While most national media express some awareness that cartoons portraying the Prophet
Muhammad, in particular Westergaard’s, are offending to Muslims, the freedom of expression as
Western value to be defended clearly comes first. A UK newspaper even sees the offender having
attacked both free speech and Western values in general: in “an attack on our open society and our
democracy” (Financial Times, 4 January 2010). The offender’s aims are enlarged to an attempt to
change Western values, and most national media clearly call for their defence. Additionally, Dutch
media compare it to other attacks, such as the ones on Dutch politician Hirschi Ali or the film maker
Theo Van Gogh, clearly defending freedom of expression. While Turkish media recognize the
cartoon’s offensive nature, even they speak of freedom of expression by referring to Westergaard’s
statement on the cartoons being linked to free press. Thus, the dominant frame here is freedom of
expression.
A minority is more cautious and raises possible boundaries of freedom of speech, especially when it
comes to religion and the question of who can really decide what is insulting to others and what not
(Netherlands Report; in particular Trouw, 6 January 2010). A German newspaper argues against
unnecessary provocations, as an open debate is only possible with respect and tolerance (Herrmann,
12 January 2010). Some point to the lacking Western understanding of how much Islam influences
Muslims, also in Western societies (Die Wertedebatte, 4 January 2010; Hannemann, 4 January
2010). And while Dutch media highlight a Danish survey of 84 per cent of the Danish agreeing with
the Danish media’s decision not to re-publish the Westergaard cartoons for security concerns,
German media also warn against retreating simply for fear of attacks.
Media discourse is framed as a clash of values. For example, UK media see a clash between Islamic
law and Western values of freedom and democracy, stating that Western values are right. Italian
media see lacking respect for Western values by some immigrants. Also the aspect of rationality/
irrationality, only raised in UK media, points to values: while the offender is said to possibly have
had a rational motive of anger for a felt offence, he acted irrationally, as in European societies
differences are settled non-violently. The relationship between the West/Europe and the Muslim
world/Islam finds attention in two ways: the larger focus lies on the Western-Islam divide and the
cultural and value contrast. Highlighted is the opposition of free societies and Islamist terrorists, the
latter being implicitly linked with Islam. A German newspaper speaks of irreconcilable values:
“Freedom and democracy are by no means ways of life that are considered as highest level of

                                   JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                               6

human development in the Islamic world. The separation of church and state is not provided for.
Even more emotional is the relationship to freedom of expression” (Die Wertedebatte: 9, translated
by author). The smaller focus lies on the value of an open debate and how to best lead it. For
example, a German newspaper sees a danger of the West becoming intolerant, when insisting too
much on its own values. This source warns that those who criticize Islam can become themselves
fundamentalist and that such thinking undermines Western values of democracy and debate
(Steinfeld, 14 January 2010). The existence of misinterpretations and antipathies in Western-
Muslim relations is mentioned, and some call to differentiate among Muslims, as not all Muslims
would act like the offender (Germany Report). Turkish media do not take either side, but simply
mention the on-going struggle between the West and religiously-inspired terrorism.
Reactions in this case mostly regard social and some legislative measures. Thus, all national media
speak of the need to improve integration of immigrants, via programs and adjusted policy.
Additionally, an Italian newspaper argues for fostering ways to counter the spread of salafism in
Western societies (Kepel, 3 January 2010). UK media also call to counter attempts by Islamic
political parties to influence Western law with Islamic values. Media here call for action, but do not
further elaborate.
Overall, the Westergaard case has raised a value debate – discourse is framed from the view of
Western values of freedom, democracy, openness and, especially, freedom of expression. While also
possible limits of these values are discussed, the value of freedom overall was dominant.

The Yemen Cargo Plane Plot
Here, we find an overall frame of control. Media focus on terrorists aiming for ever greater material
damage or human casualties. French, German, Italian and Turkish media see the attackers as having
tested airport security to find gaps in order to then conduct larger attacks and achieve maximum
damage. The offenders and terrorists in general are portrayed as learning damage maximisers.
However, German media disagree with the possibility of timing an explosion in terms of a specific
time and place, due to the impossibility of exactly tracking packages. Furthermore, Italian media
see the offenders as wanting to terrorize the West at large via continuous low-cost attacks. In fact,
this case shows that large-scale disturbances can be created at low cost.[3]
French, Spanish and Turkish media report on Al Qaeda’s increased threat-making against the West
and on Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula’s presence in Yemen. Additionally, UK media discuss
again offender rationality/irrationality, seeing the goal-oriented proceeding as quite rational. One
newspaper though also describes the offenders as irrational when aiming to send a message to the
U.S. and its allies in this manner (UK Report; Financial Times, 1 November 2010). National media
mostly apply the label of terrorist to offenders here and at times that of jihadist terrorist, but without
any systematic differentiation.
Media discourse is marked by measures of control and surveillance as well as respective legislative
adjustments. There is no explicit debate on values. Key in all national media is that security gaps in
air cargo must be closed and cargo flights more controlled. Also reported are the measures taken
immediately after the plot’s discovery, with all cargo from Yemen being checked, while normally

                                   JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                                7

most cargo is not checked. Other points refer to new working groups to devise new security
measures, meetings of security experts on air cargo handling, and U.S. technicians training airport
security staff in Yemen. Linked is the need for increased international cooperation, especially within
the EU and with the U.S. Also the possibility of expanded passenger profiling is mentioned, such as
no-fly lists for suspected terrorists. However, Dutch media raise the U.S.-EU disagreement on
passenger privacy legislation. Furthermore, German media discuss the security officials’ dilemma
that it is hardly possible to know where and from whom to expect the next attack and thus how to
prepare, as well as the existence of different security standards in different cargo companies, all
resulting in gaps that can be exploited. More tailored approaches are called for, where strictness of
controls could depend on the safety classification of the country of origin. A specific idea refers to
controlling packages already at postal stations and focusing on the “unknown small-parcel
senders” (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 9 November 2010, translated by author. National media
also discuss the difficulty of balancing security provision with civil rights, on the one side, and with
costs, on the other side. Air cargo is essentially seen as vulnerable and its complete control as too
costly (Germany Report; Netherlands Report; UK Report).
This plot has thus resulted in a discourse of control. Media clearly emphasize surveillance and
control in air cargo transport and, by extension, passenger air travel, as well as needed legislation
for stronger control. Difficulties in security provision are also discussed.
The Stockholm Attack
Here, media discourse differs from the others in that it is both more uniformly reported and broader
in the range of issues discussed. The former is likely due to the offender having sent a threat letter
and email before the attack, which all national media refer to, and the latter is due to contextual
factors playing a larger role in this attack. Thus, there is no dominant frame in discourse, but
possibly sub-frames relating to various social issues.
Based on the offender’s pre-attack communication, national media mention the war in Afghanistan
with Swedish participation and the Swedish support for the Muhammad cartoon by the Swede Lars
Vilks, as well as the offender aiming to terrorize the West. Dutch news mention Al Qaeda having
warned the Swedish government of attacks, and French media see the offender having acted out of
instigation by Al Qaeda’s Iraqi branch, the leader of which has placed a price on Vilks’ head. The
attack not being successful, German and Spanish media argue that the set-up indicates the goal of
high casualties, with the offender having planned to detonate his explosives belt at a central location
into the crowd. National media use variably the labels of Islamist, terrorist or jihadist for the
offender, without a discernible systematic differentiation. A UK paper also admits that lone jihadists
are difficult to track, but because they are not very tech-savvy, they may more often fail. This
source further argues that while radicalized views and political violence would always exist, there
are also social and economic facilitators of violence, and governments should work for including
everyone in society (Guardian, 14 December 2010). UK media do not specifically highlight the
offender living in the UK at the time, unlike some national media following below, but without a
larger study it would be speculative to argue that they downplay the threat of lone jihadists here due
to the offender’s UK link.

                                   JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                              8

German, Spanish and Turkish media also call on not blaming all Muslims for the act of one,
pointing out that not all Muslims support terrorism and that the Luton mosque in England attended
by the offender publicly denounced him for his abnormal views about Islam (Germany Report;
Spain Report; Turkey Report). German news report on failed attempts by Sweden’s political right to
use the attack for their agenda (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 16 December 2010). Italian media
also speak of a clash between violence and a free society such as Sweden, and that Sweden has
shown its willingness to live with people from various backgrounds.
Regarding reactions, national media focus on social measures. The need to maintain an open society
figures highly. For example, German media report on a proposed Swedish wiretap law for internet
and telephone connections, but warn against too much state control. While media debate the needed
monitoring of Islamist centres and of Al Qaeda communication and internet propaganda, most
national media highlight the impossibility of total control or preventing all attacks (Germany
Report; France Report; Italy Report; UK Report). Turkish media also report on Swedish politicians
reacting cautiously. Furthermore, all national media uniformly mention the need to improve
integration. Some specifically speak of many immigrants being unemployed or not good at school
and living in immigrant quarters, while the frequent violence there leads to fear among other
Swedes. Sweden’s open society is seen as value to be further promoted (Germany Report; France
Report; Italy Report; UK Report). While Dutch media judge Sweden’s immigration policy as too
mild, UK media add the need for education about Islam by Muslims to reduce Western
Islamophobia. German and French media also see benefit in school and youth campaigns to prevent
radicalization as well as in programs for terrorist defectors.
This attack has thus led to a broader discourse without a dominant frame. We can possibly speak of
various sub-frames, such as an open society, tolerance, the need to improve integration of
immigrants, and the importance of differentiation among Muslims.

Conclusions and Implications
Different attack types lead to different media discourses across Europe: the Westergaard case to a
value debate, the Yemen cargo plane plot to a discourse of control and the Stockholm case to a more
general and less defined discourse.
In the Westergaard case media discourse is framed by Western values and the need to defend them.
Although possible limits to these freedoms as well as symbolic offences against Muslims are
considered, media clearly give priority to Western values, especially freedom of expression. But the
discussion of possible limits to these values points to a struggle of ideas, and one on principles,
something that can also divide. The analysis thus exposed a possible starting point for initiating a
more fundamental debate within the West on values and rights and how far their defence can go.
On the Yemen plot, the analysis discovered a tendency of falling into the frame of control. While the
balancing with civil liberties and security provision costs also finds attention, emphasis lies on
various aspects of control and surveillance in air cargo transport, passenger air travel and needed
legislative adjustments. Here, media discourse shows the strong effect of framing. What is
problematic about this is that a dominant frame can easily override other aspects of an attack. Thus,

                                  JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                            9

attack types at locations or with means already involving surveillance, such as airports or air cargo,
could sooner lead to a discourse that loses sight of civil liberties.
Regarding the Stockholm case, a dominant frame was lacking. Rather, discourse was broad and
focused on tolerance and the value of an open society, the need to better integrate immigrants, and
the importance of differentiating among Muslims. The greater breadth of discourse may be
explained by the possible ‘reasons’ or offender motivations being broader and more abstract,
thereby giving media less to engage with.
Each of the three cases is discussed remarkably similar in different national media. Also the
phenomenon of jihadism is discussed similarly, although jihadism varies in form in different areas,
as shown by the analysed cases’ perpetrators. One may be tempted to offer the Western frame of
mind as explanation, if it was not for Turkish media. Perhaps it is a common media culture then,
driven by freedom of expression being in media’s interest. Additional aspects are media’s aim of
public attention (see also Combs, 2013) and the media-terrorism nexus, with media needing events
to cover (Martin, 1985; Nacos, 2002). However, the impact of national myths and values should
result in different reporting and framing (Entman, 2010, 1993; Goffman, 1974; Glaab 2007a; Le,
2006). To harden findings and generate more nuanced explanations on discourse convergence and
the link of attack type and discourse, further research could consider additional cases and attack
types.
Finally, media play an important role in our societies. By covering and thereby selecting particular
aspects of a terrorist attack and connecting it with a particular context, they frame our interpretation
of events and needed countermeasures. This highlights the need for responsible media coverage.
Journalists should focus on comprehensive and inclusive reporting and avoid simplified and
inflammatory us-versus-them divisions along cultural, religious or ethnic lines. Coverage should
clearly differentiate between perpetrators and a societal group sharing a religious or other
background. For example, when statements on terrorists’ Muslim background are placed in close
context with statements on lacking integration of Muslim immigrants, a dangerous false link may be
created and all Muslims may be seen as potential terrorists. This can lead to resentment of Muslims
and the view of Muslims not making enough efforts to integrate, but rather strengthening their
Islamic identity (see for example Pew Research Center, 2005; USA Today, 8 August 2006). Useful
may be a journalistic training for appropriately dealing with cultural and religious sensitivities.
This article results from the project “Technical prevention of low-cost terrorism” at the Institute for
Security and Prevention Research (http://www.isip.uni-hamburg.de/). The author and ISIP wish to
thank the cooperation partners Centre de Recherches Sociologiques sur le Droit et les Institutions
Pénales, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France; Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore & Transcrime, Italy; Centre of Counterterrorism Studies, University of Leiden, the
Netherlands; University of Barcelona & Judicial System and Human Rights Observatory, Spain;
Strategic Research Center, Bahçeşehir University, Turkey; and International Security Programme,
Chatham House, UK; as well as the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research for
funding. The author is grateful for valuable comments by project manager Michael Fischer and by
reviewers. The author is responsible for the publication’s content.

                                  JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                              10

About the author: Dr. Sybille Reinke de Buitrago is fellow at the Institute for Peace Research and
Security Policy and the Institute for Theology and Peace in Hamburg, and lecturer at Leuphana
University Lueneburg, Germany. She holds a PhD in Political Science, a MA in International
Affairs and a BA in International Studies. Her research focuses on international relations, foreign
and security policy, and peace and conflict studies, in particular perception, discourse and identity
processes.

Notes
[1] Nesser (2006) sees ideological and social issues among jihadist terrorists’ motivations; see also Nesser (2008, 2010).

[2] Western troops’ presence in predominantly Muslim countries appeared to present a key issue for jihadist terrorists, for example the
Iraq War (Nesser, 2006: 324) or the war in Afghanistan (Bakker, 2006).

[3] Only 4,200 $ were spent, advertised by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula on the cover page of its internet magazine Inspire.


Bibliography
Bakker, Edwin. Jihadi Terrorists in Europe. Netherlands Institute of International Relations
Clingendael, Security Paper 2, 2006.
Berger, Peter L. and Thomas Luckmann. The Social Construction of Reality. London: Allen Lane,
The Penguin Press, 1967.
Boulding, Kenneth E. “National Images and International Systems.” In Culture, Communication
and Conflict: Readings in Intercultural Relations, edited by Gary R. Weaver, 459-470. Needham
Heights, MA: Simon & Schuster Custom Publishing, 1996.
Combs, Cynthia C. Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century, 7th edition, Boston: Pearson, 2013.
“Die Wertedebatte läuft falsch. Anschlag auf dänischen Karikaturisten liefert neuen Zündstoff.”
Süddeutsche Zeitung, 4 January 2010.
Entman, Robert. “Media Framing Biases and Political Power: Explaining Slant in News of
Campaign 2008.” Journalism 11, no 4 (2010): 389-408.
_____. “Framing: Toward Clarification of a Fractured Paradigm.” Journal of Communication 43,
no 4 (1993): 51-58.
Financial Times. “Attack on cartoonist set to spur soul-searching.” 4 January 2010.
_____. “Yemen needs more than our military support.” 1 November 2010.
Fiske, Susan T. and Shelley E. Taylor. Social Cognition, 2nd edition, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991.
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. No title, 9 November 2010: 12.
_____. No title, 16 December 2010.
Glaab, Sonja, ed. Medien und Terrorismus – Auf den Spuren einer symbiotischen Beziehung. Berlin:
Berliner Wissenschafts-Verlag, 2007a.




                                                JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                                                  11

_____. “Die RAF und die Medien in den 1970er Jahren.” in Medien und Terrorismus – Auf den
Spuren einer symbiotischen Beziehung, edited by Sonja Glaab, 31-50. Berlin: Berliner
Wissenschafts-Verlag, 2007b.
Goffman, Erving. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1974.
Guardian. “WikiLeaks Cables: Drive to Tackle Islamists Made ‘Little Progress’.” 14 December
2010.
Hannemann, Matthias. No title, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 4 January 2010.
Herrmann, Gunnar. “Massive Selbstzensur. Dänemark hadert weiter mit den Folgen der
Karikaturenkrise.” Süddeutsche Zeitung, 12 January 2010.
Hess, Henner. “Terrorismus: Quo vadis? Kurzfristige Prognosen und mittelfristige Orientierungen.”
In Terrorismus und Extremismus – der Zukunft auf der Spur, edited by Uwe E. Kemmesies,
105-150. Munich: Luchterhand, 2006.
Hess, Henner, et al. Angriff auf das Herz des Staates. Soziale Entwicklung und Terrorismus. Vol. I
and II. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1988.
Katzenstein, Peter J., Robert O. Keohane and Stephen Krasner. “International Organization and the
Study of World Politics.” International Organization 52, no 4 (1998): 645-685.
Kepel, Gilles. “L’attentatore della porta accanto.” La Repubblica, 3 January 2010.
Le, Elisabeth. The Spiral of ‘Anti-Other Rhetoric’. Discourses of Identity and the International
Media Echo. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2006.
Linsky, Martin. Impact: How the Press Affects Federal Policymaking. New York: Norton, 1986.
Lomax Cook, Fay, et al. “Media and Agenda Setting: Effects on the Public, Interest Group Leaders,
Policy Makers, and Policy.” Public Opinion Quarterly 47, no 1 (1983): 16-35.
Martin, L. John. “The Media’s Role in International Terrorism.” Terrorism: An International
Journal 8, no 2 (1985): 127-46.
Nacos, Brigette. Mass-Mediated Terrorism: The Central Role of the Media in Terrorism and
Counterterrorism, Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield, 2002.
Nacos, Brigette, Yaeli Boch-Elkon and Robert Shapiro. Selling Fear: Counterterrorism, the Media,
and Public Opinion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Nesser, Petter. Chronology of Jihadism in Western Europe Update 2008-2010. FFI Terrorism
Research Group, 2010, http://www.ffi.no/no/Prosjekter/Terra/Publikasjoner/Documents/Petter
%20Nesser%20-%20Chronology%20of%20Jihadism%20in%20Western%20Europe%20Update
%202008-2010%20for%20FFI%20web.pdf, accessed 22 August 2011.
_____. “Chronology of Jihadism in Western Europe 1994-2007: Planned, Prepared, and Executed
Terrorist Attacks.” Studies in Conflict & Terrorism 31, no 10 (2008): 924-946.



                                  JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                              12

_____. “Jihadism in Western Europe After the Invasion of Iraq: Tracing Motivational Influences
from the Iraq War on Jihadist Terrorism in Western Europe.” Studies in Conflict & Terrorism 29, no
4 (2006): 323-342.
Pew Research Center. Islamic Extremism: Common Concern for Muslim and Western Publics. 14
July 2005, http://pewglobal.org/2005/07/14/islamic-extremism-common-concern-for-muslim-and-
western-publics/, accessed 1 September 2011.
Pritchard, David. “The News Media and Public Policy Agendas.” In Public Opinion, the Press, and
Public Policy, edited by J. David Kennamer, 103-112. Westport: Praeger, 1982.
Puglisi, Riccardo. Being the New York Times: The Political Behavior of a Newspaper, Working
Paper, 2004, http://ssrn.com/abstract=573801, accessed 2 May 2011.
Scott, William A. “Psychological and Social Correlates of International Images.” In International
Behavior: A Social-Psychological Analysis, edited by Herbert C. Kelman, 71-103. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1965.
Steinfeld, Thomas. “Unsere Hassprediger. Die Islamkritiker werden selbst zu Fundamentalisten.”
Süddeutsche Zeitung, 14 January 2010.
Sutter, Tilmann. Medienanalyse und Medienkritik. Forschungsfelder einer konstruktiven Soziologie
der Medien. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag, 2010.
Trouw. “Cartoonist krijgt meer beveiliging.” 6 January 2010.
USA Today. “USA’s Muslims under a Cloud.” 8 August 2006,
http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2006-08-09-muslim-american-cover_x.htm, accessed 1
September 2011.
de Vreese, Claes H. “News Framing: Theory and Typology.” Information Design Journal +
Document Design 13, no 1 (2005): 51-62.
Wiener, Antje. Constructivist Approaches in International Relations Theory: Puzzles and Promises.
Constitutionalism Webpapers, ConWEB 5, 2006, http://www.qub.ac.uk/schools/
SchoolofPoliticsInternationalStudiesandPhilosophy/FileStore/ConWEBFiles/Filetoupload,
52215,en.pdf, accessed 2 January 2011.




                                 JTR Volume 4, Issue 2 - Autumn 2013                          13

