    Scientific Journal of Silesian University of Technology. Series Transport
                    Zeszyty Naukowe Politechniki Śląskiej. Seria Transport

                           Volume 106                                   2020

                                         p-ISSN: 0209-3324

                                         e-ISSN: 2450-1549

                        DOI: https://doi.org/10.20858/sjsutst.2020.106.11

                              Journal homepage: http://sjsutst.polsl.pl


Article citation information:
Moșoiu, O., Bălăceanu, I., Mihai, E. Cyber terrorism and the effects of the Russian attacks on
democratic states in East Europe. Scientific Journal of Silesian University of Technology.
Series Transport. 2020, 106, 131-139. ISSN: 0209-3324.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.20858/sjsutst.2020.106.11.


Ovidiu MOȘOIU1, Ion BĂLĂCEANU2, Eduard MIHAI3



CYBER TERRORISM AND THE EFFECTS OF THE RUSSIAN
ATTACKS ON DEMOCRATIC STATES IN EAST EUROPE
         Summary. From the analysis of large-scale incidents in the field of cyber
       terrorism and the possible influence of the Russian government, it was concluded
       that cyber attacks represent threats to NATO member countries and were included
       in the list of security threats identified in the NATO`s New Strategic Concept of
       2010. This conclusion makes terrorism a new dimension, a cybernetic one, as an
       adaption of terrorism to the new era and a new defence field to be taken in
       consideration – the cybernetic field. For these reasons, in 2016, NATO recognised
       the importance of introducing virtual space as an operational domain, which
       opened the gates to cyber security, and invited member countries to contribute to
       the development of cyber defence projects. The solution of the cyber attacks has
       created the conditions for normal functioning of any state critical infrastructure.
         Keywords: cyber terrorism, terrorist organisations, cyber threats, cyber space,
       internet services, cyber warfare, computer networks, virtual space




1
  ”Henri Coandă” Air Force Academy, Braşov, Romania. Email: ovidiu_mosoiu@yahoo.com
2
  ”Carol I” National Defence University, Bucharest, Romania. Email: balaceanugion@yahoo.com
3
  ”Henri Coandă” Air Force Academy, Braşov, Romania. Email: mishued2004@gmail.com

132                                                          O. Moșoiu, I. Bălăceanu, E. Mihai

1. INTRODUCTION

     The security actions for cyber space represent a common effort of those who apply law,
governments, technological industries and individuals in society. In order to secure the cyber
space, a great understanding of the phenomenon of cybernetic terrorism is needed,
a contemporary phenomenon that has the cyber space as a battlefield and is proliferated
through the internet, without referring to physical destruction of the network, but the
establishment of terror among the state and the non-state actors who use it. Thus, the term
cyber-terrorism refers to the use of tactics and techniques of informational warfare by the
terrorist organisations, which affect the cyber space. Moreover, cyber terrorism operates
exclusively in virtual space and does not physically destroy the infrastructure that supports the
existence of the cyber space. While computer-based terrorists seek an impact on the concerns
and actions of “real” people from the “real” world, they operate within the virtual world of
cyber space to manipulate these actors.
     In 2000, Dorothy Denning, an information security researcher in cyber terrorism, define
cyber terrorism as “a convergence of terrorism and cyber space. Cyber terrorism consists in
planning illegal attacks and threats against computers, networks and stored information on
them, in order to create a fear climate or to exert pressures on a government, a non-
governmental international organisation or through population to fulfil certain objectives
related to pursuit of a political cause, religious, racial or ideological, by affecting the
integrity and confidentiality of information, computer system and computer networks” [3].
Later on, the fast development of cyber terrorism required new global strategies, with
responsibility for ensuring cyber security to all the actors involved in fighting against the
cybercrime phenomenon. As can be seen, cyber terrorism does not differ from conventional
terrorism as a goal, it is taken seriously by the government and it is intended to secure the
operating means, the networks and interconnected critical infrastructure [8].
     From the military point of view, the cyber space has determined the appearance of cyber
weapons, used in new types of military operations, which differ from the classical ones by the
way of manifestation, the aim being the same – eliminating the opponent. Whatever the type of
conflict will be in the future, cyber terrorism will be integrated into all forms of war
(conventional or unconventional). Due to the cross-border features of government-led internet
actions, organisations as NATO and the EU have recognised the importance of the cyber space
and launched a series of cooperation projects between member states on cyber security, training
and education in this multidisciplinary field.
     In 2014, Laurian Gherman, highlighted the importance of the cyberspace domain “if our
ability to acquire and to send information is reduced by the enemy, our concept of
information superiority is doomed. From this point of view, today and in the future, the
electronic warfare role will be very important. For this reason, the physical domain of the
electromagnetic spectrum should be at the same level as the land, maritime, air and space
domains and all should be networked” [5].
     The appearance of the Russian hybrid war in the Ukrainian area did not end with the
annexation of the Crimean Peninsula (2014). The success of this operation was accomplished
through the use of elite troops (the so-called “green-men”) along with an informational
warfare campaign conducted by various Russian proxies. Moreover, there are reasonable
suspicions of using the electoral war, generated by the Russian Federation`s involvement in
the US presidential campaign (2016), the elections in Germany (2015), France, Netherland
and Ukraine (2019), and to organise a plot to overthrow the pro-NATO government in
Montenegro (2016). All these analysed aspects allow us to conclude that an electoral war is

Cyber terrorism and the effects of the Russian attacks on…                                  133.

happening, orchestrated by the Russian Federation, and is taking place at this time, with
difficulties in imagining the implications, both in the political and the economic spheres.
     The lesson learned, especially from the three cases of cyber attacks (over Estonia,
Georgia and Ukraine), have shown different faces of the security and the cyber defence from
a technical, diplomatic, sociological and military view. As a result, the cyber security
measures to be taken must be the result of a union of forces between government IT
specialists, the private and public departments, as well as state actors specialised in cyber
security of economic structures.


2. THE CYBER ATTACK OVER ESTONIA

     The first massive cyber attack in Eastern Europe was recorded in Estonia, one of the
Baltic republics that were embedded in the Soviet Union in 1940. After the dissolution of the
Soviet Union, Estonia regained its independence and quickly began the process of economic,
political, social and military reforms. It joined the EU and NATO in order to secure its
national security. The Estonian authorities saw Russia as the most serious threat, and
integration with Western structures was the solution to overcome this threat. One of the main
disputes in bilateral relations was “the issue of the Russian minority in Estonia that represents
26% of the population” [7].
     Since April 2007, tensions between Estonia and Russia increased significantly as a result
of the Tallinn (Estonian capital) authorities’ decision to move the Soviet Monument to the
centre of the city (the monument commemorates the Soviet soldiers who liberated Estonia).
After the statue was moved, the relationship between Estonia and Russia became tense, with
the Kremlin “accusing the Tallinn authorities of violating human rights, for which they
demanded the resignation of the Estonian Prime Minister” [9]. At the same time, violent
fights broke out in the streets between the police and the Russian minority in Estonia, protests
in front of the Moscow Embassy in Moscow and massive cyber attacks. The attacks flowed as
follows: in the first phase, their coordination was done through forums and the
synchronization of human actions, and in the second phase coordination was delegated to the
command and control servers of the botnet network. The second phase ran from April 30th to
May 18th and ran in four waves of varying intensity, focusing on different targets and using
various attack techniques. The first wave of attacks on May 4th consisted of DDoS
(Distributed Denial of Services) attacks on DNS sites and systems. The second wave
considered the peak of the attack, took place on May 9th; then the number of hostile acts
began to decline. On May 11th, paid botnets ended DDoS attacks with government and
financial services sites inclusive. The third wave of attacks began on May 15th and included
DDoS botnet attacks against government and financial industry websites. The fourth wave of
attacks again consisted of attacks on government sites and banks. The DDoS attacks
successfully targeted the websites of all ministries, two large banks and several political
parties. Hackers “have been able to close the parliament's e-mail server and have disabled
ATMs” [9]. One of the Estonian banks that was the victim of cyber attacks estimated losses of
around $ 1 million. However, when assessing losses at the end of the attacks, it was
surprisingly found that the damage done by cyber attacks was relatively low.
     Unlike the first phase attacks, the second phase was based on the botnet, which is today
considered the main vehicle and platform for cybercrime. Cybernetic (cyber attack) in Estonia
since 2007 has been widely debated in the media and has been called “the first cyber war in
history. This has shown how new technology could be used to attack a modern country. It has

134                                                            O. Moșoiu, I. Bălăceanu, E. Mihai

been proven that the attacks came from Russia, with most DDoS attacks being initiated from
Russian IP addresses”[11]. A lot of attackers used computers in Estonia, which indicated the
Russian minority. Even though the technical experts from the European Commission and
NATO found no evidence that the attacks were committed by the Russian authorities, they
were considered to come from the Kremlin. A member of the Russian youth organisation,
NASHI, affiliated with the party of Vladimir Putin, confessed that “he stood behind the
attacks” [6].
      The supposed objectives of the cyber attacks were to try to influence the Tallinn
authorities to withdraw the decision to remove the monument. Another objective was to test
the Russian capabilities of cyber war and to see NATO's reaction when one of its members
was attacked in a new field. In addition, a third objective was linked to the fact that the
Estonian society is dependent on the Internet. Cyber attacks have been carried out to prove
that NATO and the EU would not defend the Estonian society from the Russian attack and the
Russians do not need tanks to cause damage to Estonia. Due to these attacks, Russia's political
objectives were not achieved as the monument was not moved, and Estonia became a leader
in cyber security. NATO has accelerated its cyber defence projects and created the Centre for
Excellence for Cooperation in Cyber Defence, located near Tallinn. Estonia and Western
allies have secured mutual support for future large-scale attacks on IT and C infrastructures,
thus increasing the potential risks and costs for an opponent who tolerates or even uses
volunteer groups to attack foreign Internet infrastructure. As a result, Estonia has become
closer than ever to Western security institutions, while Russia's cultural and political influence
on Estonia has diminished. Regardless of the fact that Russia's foreign policy circles were
defined as strategic objectives, cyber attacks against Estonia have not advanced political
causes on the part of Russia.
      The first lesson learned by the Estonians, as well as the world over, was that cyber security
and defence of the national network involved not only technical details of the attacks but also
strategies and policies of a technological nature. CERT-EE team tactics have been to maintain
critical online sites, such as banking sites, rather than government websites, even if their failure
was a sign of weakness on the part of the country's government, and was a real success for
attackers. Another tactic was to keep the parliament's email server even in the network, even if
it was necessary to physically move the server from one internet provider to another. This has
hardened the attackers, who have put all their attention and energy in shutting down this server
without having to worry about other critical targets.
      In conclusion, action efficiency is a basic feature of cyber attacks. In the case of Estonia,
the aggressors did not achieve their political goals. The main tool of all the attacks was the
brutal DDoS attack, which took place primarily with massive botnet networks and later, by
patriotic hackers using previously prepared tools. In Estonia, government sites, as well as
banks and newspapers online, were disrupted. As a result of the hostile action, most internet
services collapsed and their restoration was rather cumbersome. However, the Estonian
information society seemed to be quite resilient, which made it unstoppable after the cyber
attacks.


3. CYBER ATTACK OVER GEORGIA

     The second cyber attack took place in Georgia and was called “the first war in the air, at
sea, on the ground and in cyberspace”. Georgia regained its independence after the collapse of
the Soviet Union, having a long history and strong national consciousness; it was different from

Cyber terrorism and the effects of the Russian attacks on…                                     135.

the other Soviet countries. Since the early 1990s, Georgia has wanted integration with the West.
This trend has been strengthened since 2003 when the Rose Revolution took place, and
President Eduard Shevardnadze was overthrown. The newly elected president, Mikhail
Saakashvili, engaged in integration with Western structures and attempted to re-integrate
Georgia's radical provinces – South Ossetia and Abkhazia. His attempts received a strong
reaction from Russia and led to the outbreak of the 2008 war. This conflict, which began on
August 7th and lasted for 5 days, was a reminder of classical states versus states in conflict,
which seems to have been forgotten in the 21st century. Despite the fact that the war was
classical, and the army's behaviour on the battlefield recalls the 20th century, a certain aspect of
it was a novelty - it was the first war that took place in the air, on the ground, at sea and in
cyberspace.
     The first informational attacks occurred several months before the outbreak of the war.
On July 19th, the security firm “FireEye informed about DDoS attacks against Georgian
sites” [4]. A scenario similar to previous attacks was repeated on a larger scale on August 8th
and coincided with the entry of Russian troops into South Ossetia. The attack by Russian
hackers can be divided into two phases. In the first phase, they focused mainly on Georgian
news and government websites. In the second phase, a lot of patriotic hackers joined the
campaign against Georgia. Until August 10th, most Georgian government sites were
inoperative, and the Georgian government could not communicate with the rest of the world
via the Internet. The content of the Georgian President's website was replaced by images that
described M. Saakashvili as Hitler. Also, banks did not work in Georgia, as did mobile
phones. According to Captain Paulo Shakarian's views in the US Army, “Russian hackers
have tested their skills and ability to lead limited attacks” [10].
     There were two other interesting aspects of Georgia's cyber attack. The first is about
coordinating conventional blows with cyber attacks, which are often unseen. However, there
are two examples that could indicate the cooperation between classical and cyber forces. The
first example was that conventional attacks have omitted media and communications sites,
leaving these targets for cyber attacks. The second example was an attack on diesel generator
rental sites that wanted to support the conventional blow to Georgia's electricity
infrastructure. The second aspect interestingly includes training IT tools, training, creating
special sites to do these attacks, which may indicate that Russia has been preparing this war
for a long time. Access to available Russian tools and instructions for use cannot be prepared
in one day. Following a massive disruption of sites, the Georgian authorities first tried to filter
IP addresses from Russia, but they quickly changed tactics and used non-Russian servers.
Later, the Georgian authorities requested help from the United States, Poland and Estonia, and
Georgian servers were relocated.
     Georgia's cyber attack was a manifestation of an informational or media war intended to
disrupt its access to any news source. The authors pursued three main objectives. The first
was to show the whole world the fragility of the Saakashvili regime, which lost control of its
own state, and the paralysis of the state following the Russian invasion. The second,
addressed to the Georgian society, was to interrupt any source of information and to present
its own propaganda in order to spread chaos and misinformation to undermine the morale and
faith of the population in the government. The third objective is linked to the second phase of
attacks against the economic system. Most likely, it wanted to cause serious damage to
Georgia's economic development and persuade the population to withdraw support from
Saakashvili. The objectives were not mainly achieved due to US and EU aid (CERT, CERT-
EE, CERT-PL, CERT-FR). Government sites were restored, and the Georgian society

136                                                           O. Moșoiu, I. Bălăceanu, E. Mihai

regained access to information. The US also pledged financial support to the Georgian
government.
      The lesson learned in this context, by creating a change of mentality, globally, such as
that cyber security is accomplished by technical means, but it is people, strategy,
commitment, and not computers, which are simple tools, weapons of attack. Participants in
DDoS attacks were motivated by factors such as adherence to group rules, social validation
and contagion, which contributed to the success of the attacks. The rapid influence of the
population by online means was a good example of copying and using, for the Russian
authorities, which was seen a year later in Georgia's cyber attack that accompanied the
conventional war. In this case, a new element - online propaganda appeared. Georgia was
perfectly aware of its economic, military, and political inferiority to Russia and, through
public relations services, Aspect Consulting, a media propaganda used as a weapon against
the Russians. International media agencies and special Western media were bombarded with
information that Georgian civilians were being attacked by the Russian army, and media
relations yielded favourable evidence to Georgia and unfavourable Russia. After tensions
were doused, Western newspapers that held Georgia's position and accused Russia became
more critical on the circumstances in which the conflict started, having realised the false
theory that Georgia was the innocent victim of Russian aggression.
      In conclusion, the lesson learned from the military and legislative point of view was that
the meaning of an effective response to cyber attacks of the size and type of Georgia is limited
by legislation. More importantly, they include promoting effective international technology
cooperation, as there is no way for a country to coordinate its defence against attacks from
other jurisdictions. However, it must be taken in consideration that no national or
international entity has the authority to legislate in the cybernetic field, national efforts will
need to work with international instruments of different fields and with a different focus. In
addition to that, the attack technique was interesting. There were similarities that may indicate
that the aggressor could be the same as in Estonia. Although, the case of Georgia seems a
little bit different, in a way the attack was more sophisticated. Government sites, as well as
banks and newspapers online, were disrupted. As a result of the hostile actions, most internet
services collapsed and their restoration was rather difficult.


4. CYBER ATTACK OVER UKRAINE

     The third cyber attack, massively recorded in history, was the one of Ukraine, which has
been considered as a case of cyber spying. Prior to the 2014 revolution, Ukraine experienced
a rather typical series of cyber incidents, of which the most common were botnets controlled
by DDoS. Often, they came as retaliation for unpopular government initiatives (for example,
when the authorities tried to close the file-sharing site, http://www.ex.ua). By the end of 2012,
part of the public's frustration was channelled into the deterioration of politically motivated
(“graffiti digital”) sites in the Ukrainian government's virtual space. In 2013, a serious
malware class was discovered, and network vandalism sparked an increase in cyber spying,
for which cyber security companies developed a list of names: RedOctober, MiniDuke,
NetTraveler and more. After the revolution began, in February 2014, ordinary Ukrainians
became acquainted with the combination of hacking and political activism (“hacktivism”), in
which attackers carried psychological warfare through the Internet. Although a large number
of people have been exhausted by major political events that have shaken Ukraine, it has been
hard to ignore the publication of leaks of Ukrainian government documents. The most

Cyber terrorism and the effects of the Russian attacks on…                                  137.

prominent hacking group was CyberBerkut, whose famous attack created serious problems
for the country's infrastructure.
     There have been significant cyber-spying operations directed against victims of Russia's
strategic interests, particularly with regard to the situation in Ukraine. However, there were no
profound, coercive and harmful attacks similar to those taking place in Estonia in 2007 or in
Georgia in 2008. Examples reported by the NCA in Ukraine include mainly Denial of Service
(DoS) and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), designed to undermine the Ukrainian
telecommunication infrastructure. For attackers, these were low-risk ways to disrupt the flow
of information from the Ukrainian national security space, as well as a way of selectively and
temporarily silencing the online voice [7].
     In the Russia-Ukraine conflict, the operations in informational networks were not limited
to the notion of cyberwar. An examination of the sustained tensions suggests that this was
warfare for strategic theft and manipulation of information, not the widespread application of
destructive cyber attacks. Cyber espionage campaigns in Russia over time and against
numerous targets undoubtedly have a considerable advantage in understanding, anticipating
and, in some cases, overcoming enemies. This approach may have made DDoS and other
destructive attacks less necessary or preferable. One of the most important aspects of the three
cases is their author. The cyberspace architecture does not allow us to unequivocally assert
who was responsible for cyber attacks. The fact is that most of the attacks came from Russia,
and this can lead to three hypotheses. [1]
     The first hypothesis is based on the assumption that the attacks were carried out by Russian
amateurs, patriotic hackers who wanted to cyber-attack to express their affront to the offence
brought about by the politics of Estonia and Georgia. This assumption is unlikely, mainly due to
the lack of technical skills of these hackers. During the attacks, advanced botnets consisted of
using thousands of computers that are inaccessible to average Internet users. In addition, for
Ukraine, the Russian social networks of hackers were not involved. The second assumption was
that Russian cybercrime groups on their own, especially Russian business networks, carried out
the attacks. The use of advanced botnets owned by Russian cybercriminals has highlighted the
commitment of Russian hackers. These groups are mainly seeking money. It is hard to mention
the financial potential benefits that could have been obtained by attacking Georgian, Estonian
and Ukrainian sites. Because of this, these assumptions seem improbable. The third theory is
based on the presumption that the Russian authorities have committed cybercriminals from the
Russian Business Network to lead attacks against Estonia, Georgia and Ukraine. This sentence
seems most likely from several considerations. Russia wanted to punish these countries, but it
was unable, especially in the case of Estonia - a NATO member - to hire the state to sponsor the
offensive. So it was convenient to hire cybercriminals who carried the offensive campaign on
behalf of the Russian authorities. The second important aspect is the full control of the Russian
Internet streams by the Moscow authorities, so an attack of this magnitude could not have gone
unnoticed by the authorities, thus they were made with the tacit agreement of the government
Russian.
     The lesson learned in Ukraine was the fundamental lack of understanding of cyber
security on the part of users. Therefore, each institution attempted to develop a malware
“literacy campaign” to let employees know how to start system infections and how attackers
can control their computers then to steal documents, all through a small program,
unauthorised dimensions that can be hard to detect. Lack of experience and perception of the
cyber-threat (from both the public, population and private institutions) is the key to making
international consensus on cyber security issues more time-consuming. On the other hand
“the majority of the world's states invest billions of dollars in online attacks that regard

138                                                           O. Moșoiu, I. Bălăceanu, E. Mihai

information in all areas (politics, diplomacy, economy, defence, culture, science, and so on)”
[2].


5. CONCLUSIONS:

     Following the analysis of the three cases of cyber attack, we can state that there is a trend
in the future of military competition in cyberspace. From a military point of view, the
information society has led to the development of specific cases of attack in the new
competitive space – the cyberspace. Similar to classical actions, both simple tools and actions
are used, as well as cyber attacks carried out according to hybrid rules and laws. In the case of
malware in the system, the problem of IT specialists has gone beyond the boundaries of IT
and C and has become a cyber security issue, which can be a major challenge with
repercussions on the security of critical state infrastructures. Viruses can also be a military
tool with destructive effects on information.
     Based on the military and legal lessons learned from the recent public cyber attacks, it
seems that a contemporary way to cyber-attack a country is “using the grey area” in the law
that does not invoke the Law of the organisation of the armed conflict (LOAC), as the
International Humanitarian Law. The authors of the attacks act in particular in an area that
triggered the application of relevant provisions in criminal law, poorly developed in many
countries, and which has unsolicited ground for cross-border cooperation. This will require
time to reach an additional consensus on international legal issues of cyber defence. So far,
only 23 countries have ratified the crime of cybercrime and only a few have been able to
genuinely test national defence for the law. Moreover, the training of countries in the field of
cyber security is different and is related to their degree of economic and military
development.
     The cyber operational environment will continue to evolve, presenting to the military
forces various challenges in the form of threats posed by opponents, which carry out actions
ranging from conventional to unconventional, with capabilities that include state-of-the-art
weaponry and technology. These opponents can include extremely well-trained and highly-
equipped conventional forces as well as specialised forces to conduct irregular fighting,
resulting in a force that uses the hybrid threat.


References

1.    Bălăceanu Ion, Virgil Manea, Ovidiu Moșoiu. 2019. Sistemul interinstituțional de
      prevenire și combatere a amenițărilor neconvenționale în zona de interes strategic a
      României, “Henri Coandă” Brașov: Air Force Academy Printed House. ISBN 978-606-
      8356-68-6. [In Romanian: Interinstitutional system for preventing and fighting
      unconventional threats in the area of strategic interest of Romania].
2.    Cioacă Cătălin. 2009. “Cyber – Terrorism, an Instability Global Source”. Review of the
      Air Force Academy 2(15). Brașov: “Henri Coandă” Air Force Academy Printed House.
      ISSN 1842-9238.
3.    Denning Dorothy. “Cyberterrorism”. Available at:
      http://palmer.wellesley.edu/~ivolic/pdf/Classes/Handouts/NumberTheoryHandouts/Cyber
      terror-Denning.

Cyber terrorism and the effects of the Russian attacks on…                                   139.

4.  Foxall Andrew. 2016. “Putin’s Cyberwar: Russia’s Statecraft in the Fifth Domain”.
    Russia Studies Centre Policy Paper 9. The Henry Jackson Society. Available at:
    http://www.stratcomcoe.org/do wnload/file/fid/5212.
5. Gherman Laurian. 2014. „Electronic warfare in information age”. Review of Air Force
    Academy 3. Brașov: “Henri Coandă” Air Force Academy Printed House. ISSN 1842-
    9238.
6. Greenberg Andy. “The State of Cyber Security When Cyber Terrorism Becomes State
    Censorship”. Forbes.com. Available at: http://www.forbes.com/2008/05/14/cyberattacks-
    terrorism-estonia-tech-security08-cx_ag_0514attacks. html.
7. Kozłowski Andrzej. 2014. “Comparative analysis of cyberattacks on Estonia, Georgia
    and Kyrgyzstan”. European Scientific Journal (ESJ) 3. Available at:
    http://www.eujournal.org/index.php/esj/article/view/2941.
8. Moldovan Marius, Ion Bălăceanu. 2018. Reconfigurarea balanței de putere militară în
    zona estică de interes strategic a României, București: National Defence University
    “Carol I” Printed House. [In Romanian: Reconfigure the military power balance in the
    eastern area of strategic interest of Romania].
9. Nazario Jose. Politically Motivated Denial of Service Attacks. NATO CCDCOE.
    Available at:
    https://ccdcoe.org/sites/default/files/multimedia/pdf/12_NAZARIO%20Politically%20M
    otivated%20 DDoS.pdf.
10. Rețea cu un număr mare de calculatoare virusate ce sunt manipulate de infractorii
    cibernetici de la distanță, în scopul atacurilor DDoS sau SPAM. Available at:
    https://usa.kaspersky.com/resource-center/threats/botnet-attacks. [In Romanian: Network
    with a large number of viruses that are handled by remote cybercriminals for DDoS or
    SPAM attacks].
11. William C. Ashmore. “Impact of Alleged Ryssuan Cyber Attaks”. SAMS 2009.
    Available at: http://nsarchive.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB424/docs/Cyber-027.pdf.


Received 19.10.2019; accepted in revised form 20.12.2019




     Scientific Journal of Silesian University of Technology. Series Transport is licensed under
                     a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

